University of Birmingham


Lumbar muscle adaptations to external
perturbations are modulated by trunk posture
Abboud, Jacques; Ducas, Julien; Marineau-Bélanger, Émile; Gallina, Alessio

DOI:
10.1007/s00421-023-05223-2
License:
Other (please specify with Rights Statement)


Document Version
Peer reviewed version

Citation for published version (Harvard):
Abboud, J, Ducas, J, Marineau-Bélanger, É & Gallina, A 2023, 'Lumbar muscle adaptations to external
perturbations are modulated by trunk posture', European Journal of Applied Physiology.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-023-05223-2




Link to publication on Research at Birmingham portal




Publisher Rights Statement:
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM
terms of use, but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections. The Version of
Record is available online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00421-023-05223-2




General rights
Unless a licence is specified above, all rights (including copyright and moral rights) in this document are retained by the authors and/or the
copyright holders. The express permission of the copyright holder must be obtained for any use of this material other than for purposes
permitted by law.

•Users may freely distribute the URL that is used to identify this publication.
•Users may download and/or print one copy of the publication from the University of Birmingham research portal for the purpose of private
study or non-commercial research.
•User may use extracts from the document in line with the concept of ‘fair dealing’ under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (?)
•Users may not further distribute the material nor use it for the purposes of commercial gain.

Where a licence is displayed above, please note the terms and conditions of the licence govern your use of this document.

When citing, please reference the published version.
Take down policy
While the University of Birmingham exercises care and attention in making items available there are rare occasions when an item has been
uploaded in error or has been deemed to be commercially or otherwise sensitive.

If you believe that this is the case for this document, please contact UBIRA@lists.bham.ac.uk providing details and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate.




Download date: 29. Mar. 2026
Lumbar muscle adaptations to external perturbations are
modulated by trunk posture


Accepted for publication: European Journal of Applied Physiology


Jacques Abboud1,2, Julien Ducas1,2, Émile Marineau-Bélanger1,2, Alessio Gallina3,4


Authors informations:
   1. Département des Sciences de l’Activité Physique, Université du Québec à Trois-
       Rivières, 3351 Boul. des Forges, Trois-Rivières, Qc, G8Z 4M3, Canada
   2. Groupe de Recherche sur les Affections Neuromusculosquelettiques GRAN,
       Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières, Trois-Rivières, Canada
   3. School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham,
       Birmingham, UK
   4. Centre of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain, School of Sport, Exercise and
       Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK


Corresponding author: Jacques Abboud, 3351, boul. des Forges, C.P. 500, Trois-
Rivières, Qc, Canada, G8Z 4M3. Telephone number: +1 (819) 376-5011 ext 3783. E-mail:
jacques.abboud@uqtr.ca




Statements and Declarations: There is no conflict of interest.




Funding: This research received funding from Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC).



Category: Original article




                                                                                     1
Abstract

Purpose: To investigate if the recruitment of different regions within the lumbar extensor muscles
in response to unexpected perturbations depends on trunk posture.
Methods: In a semi-seated posture, healthy adult participants experienced unexpected posterior-
anterior trunk perturbations in three different postures: neutral, trunk flexion and left trunk rotation.
High-density surface electromyography was used to identify the regional distribution of activation
within the lumbar erector spinae muscles. The effect of posture and side (left vs right) on muscle
activity and centroid coordinates was investigated at baseline and in response to perturbation.
Results: Higher muscle activity was observed in trunk flexion compared to neutral and rotation
postures at baseline (multiple p<0.001) and in response to the perturbation (multiple p<0.01). At
baseline, the centroid of the electromyographic amplitude distribution was localized more medially
in trunk flexion compared to trunk neutral posture (p=0.003), while activation was localized more
laterally in response to the perturbation (multiple p<0.05). When the trunk was rotated, the
electromyographic amplitude distribution was localized more cranially on the left than the right side,
both at baseline (p=0.001) and in response to the perturbation (p=0.001). Finally, a more lateral
location of the centroid on the left side in rotation in compared to neutral posture was observed in
response to the perturbation (multiple p<0.001).
Conclusions: Regional differences in the distribution of electromyography amplitude indicate that
different muscle regions were recruited in different trunk postures and in response to perturbations,
possibly based on regional mechanical advantage of the erector spinae muscle fibers.



Keywords: Erector spinae, Trunk, Postural perturbation, High-density EMG



Abbreviations:

ANOVA            Analysis of variance

EMG              Electromyography

HDsEMG           High-density surface electromyography

MVIC             Maximal voluntary isometric contractions

RMS              Root mean square

SD               Standard deviation




                                                                                                       2
Introduction

Over the past two decades, there has been a growing interest in understanding how different

lumbar muscles contribute to trunk postural control and its movement. Recently, a clear distinction

in motor unit territories has been discovered between the upper (L1 to L3 vertebrae) and lower (L3

to L4 vertebrae) regions of the erector spinae muscles (Abboud et al. 2020), which allows a regional

activation of these muscles during voluntary movements, such as trunk rotation. These localized

motor unit territories are a neuroanatomical prerequisite for regional activation of the erector spinae,

which has been observed in different functional tasks (Serafino et al. 2021) and when assessing

neuromuscular strategies in individuals with low back pain (Falla et al. 2014). However, it is

currently unclear whether the regional activation can be observed in response to perturbations

applied with the trunk in different postures.

According to the neuromechanical principle (Hudson et al. 2019), motor units are recruited

according to a mechanical advantage during complex tasks where joint angle and fibre orientation

varies. For instance, recruitment of inspiratory motor unit is optimized with muscle length changes,

i.e. motor unit are activated earlier or within specific muscle regions where the mechanical

advantage is largest (Butler and Gandevia 2008). Anatomical variations in the erector spinae fiber

orientation (Bogduk 2005) may confer a mechanical advantage for motor unit recruitment localized

in different regions within this muscle. Since fiber orientation changes with trunk posture (Harriss

and Brown 2015; McGill et al. 2000), this mechanical advantage may depend on the trunk position.

In an erect posture, the muscle fibers of the lumbar erector spinae have a posterior and caudal

orientation (Harriss and Brown 2015), which generates posterior shear forces to support any

anterior reaction shear forces. When the trunk is flexed, however, they lose such ability because

their line of action becomes parallel to the compression axis (McGill et al. 2000). Moreover, in a

flexed posture, the gravitational moment increases, which increase the demand of the lumbar

muscles to stabilise the trunk. When the trunk is rotated to the right, ipsilateral lumbar muscles

showed higher activation while performing trunk extension in comparison with contralateral lumbar

muscles (Ng et al. 2001), which may lead to asymmetrical responses in response to external

perturbations. Therefore, changing the trunk posture would require adaptations of motor unit


                                                                                                      3
recruitment according to the mechanical advantage of the muscles (Hudson et al. 2019). For

instance, it has been shown that regional activity of the deep trunk muscles (quadratus lumborum)

and the psoas major depends on their mechanical advantage during anticipatory postural

adjustment tasks (Park et al. 2014). This observation can be explained by the anatomical variation

of these muscles, such as orientation of the muscle fascicles, based on spine curvature. Based on

these findings, it could be hypothesized that the regional activity of the erector spinae muscles

depends on the mechanical advantage of this specific region.

Regional activation could be a strategy to minimize the functional cost while maintaining the task

goal. When executing a voluntary motor task such as bending forward, the central nervous system

may optimize certain cost functions to determine how motion of the spine will be performed

(Todorov and Jordan 2002). This strategy could also be relevant for rapid motor responses, such

as unexpected movements (Pruszynski and Scott 2012). Recent studies have shown that spatial

variations of muscle activity between and within trunk muscles could occur to control the trunk

movements (Hodges et al. 2013), even in response to unexpected trunk perturbations (Abboud et

al. 2016). A better understanding of the neuromuscular strategies employed to oppose

perturbations when the trunk is in different trunk postures may be more representative of real-life

events, when the trunk can be subjected to external unexpected forces while the individual is not

standing with their trunk in an erect position.

The aim of this study was to investigate if the recruitment of different regions within the lumbar

extensor muscles is modulated by the mechanical advantage of its fibers, which we manipulated

by changing trunk orientation during unexpected trunk perturbations. We also compared side

differences since trunk rotation is associated to asymmetrical activation of the lumbar muscles. We

hypothesized that the erector spinae would be activated regionally based on the trunk position, in

line with the presumed mechanical advantage of the recruited muscle region.




                                                                                                 4
Methods

Participants

Twenty healthy adult participants (10 men and 10 women) took part in this study. Exclusion criteria

were as follows: presence of low back pain in the past year; spinal surgery; inflammatory arthritis

of the axial skeleton; advanced osteoporosis; severe and incapacitating pain limiting the ability to

perform the evaluation protocol in the laboratory; pregnancy. Participants mean for age, weight,

height, and BMI were respectively: 24.3±3.9 years, 67.49±12.45 kg, 169.3±9.2 cm and 23.44±3.24

kg/m2. Participants were recruited among the university community. The project received approval

from the Research Ethics Board for human research of the “Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières”

(CER-21-276-07.06). All participants gave written informed consent, acknowledging their right to

withdraw from the experiment without consequences.



Study design

To answer the aim of this study, the experimental protocol was conducted over one session during

which the lumbar extensor regional activation was assessed across 3 series of 10 perturbations,

each in a different trunk posture. The order of the posture was randomized between participants,

and a rest-period of 10 min was added between each series of trunk perturbations.

Electromyography (EMG) data of the right side of one participant was excluded from the analysis

due to excessive movement artefacts in the signals.



Trunk perturbation protocol

Before the trunk perturbation protocol, participants were asked to perform three trunk extension

maximal voluntary isometric contractions (MVICs) using the same apparatus as the perturbation

protocol. A belt was positioned on the upper thoracic and in a neutral posture, participants were

asked to pull posteriorly against this belt. A 1-min rest period was provided between each MVIC to

limit muscle fatigue. The highest MVIC in trunk extension was used for EMG normalization.

Participants then experienced sudden external posterior-anterior trunk perturbations (Figure 1). To

induce these perturbations, participants were in a semi-seated positioned on a custom-made


                                                                                                  5
apparatus as described previously (Dupeyron et al. 2010; Larivière et al. 2010; Radebold et al.

2000). This position was chosen to minimize the contribution of the lower limb to better assess the

contribution of the trunk muscles to oppose the perturbation. On this apparatus, participants were

asked to adopt three different postures. The ‘Neutral’ posture corresponded to a neutral semi-

seated position with participants’ knees flexed at ~75°. The ‘Trunk flexion’ posture corresponded

to a 40° of trunk flexion in a semi-seated position. Finally, the ‘Trunk Rotation’ posture

corresponded to 30° of left trunk rotation in a semi-seated position. The target trunk flexion posture

was monitored in real-time using a digital inclinometer (± 0.1° of precision, model 40–6067,

Johnson Level & Tool Mfg. Co., Inc. Mequon, WI) placed on the L3 vertebrae. Trunk rotation

posture was standardized with the help of a laser pointer mounted on the right acromion of the

scapula and a target on the wall in front of the participant. The laser and a target in front of the

participants were also used to ensure consistent trunk rotation posture within and between trials.

In all posture, the perturbations were delivered via a cable attached to a custom-made harness

installed over the upper body, approximately at the T9 vertebra level. This cable was connected to

a load cell (Model LSB350; Futek Advanced Sensor Technology Inc, Irvine, CA, USA) which was

connected to a small motor (Figure 1). When the motor released the cable, a posterior to anterior

perturbation was applied since participants were performing an isometric trunk flexion. The

magnitude of the trunk perturbation was computed based on participants’ MVIC in trunk flexion in

a neutral semi-seated position. Three MVIC in trunk flexion were performed with one minute of rest

between them and the highest value was considered for the perturbation protocol. Then,

participants were asked to maintain 20% of their MVIC. They were provided visual feedback of their

force using a computer screen positioned in front of them. Once the targeted force was achieved

and maintained, a sudden perturbation was induced with a random delay between 1, 3 and 5s to

avoid any anticipation of the trunk perturbation onset. Participants wore headphones to mute the

sound of the perturbation trigger. Participants were asked to return to their initial position after each

perturbation.



Data collection


                                                                                                       6
The right and left lumbar extensor muscle activity was recorded with two high-density surface EMG

(HDsEMG) of 64 electrodes arranged in 8 columns and 8 rows spaced by 10 mm (semidisposable

adhesive matrix; model ELSCH064, OTBioelettronica, Torino, Italy). The skin over the lumbar

extensor muscles was cleaned with fine-grade sandpaper (Red DotTrace Prep; 3 M, St. Paul, MN),

and shaved. The electrode grids were placed orienting the columns along the approximate fiber

orientation of the erector spinae muscles. The center of each grid was located at L3 level, and the

medial edge of the grid was at ~1 cm from the L3 spinous process. The grid spanned approximately

L1 to L4-L5. The reference electrode was placed over T12 spinous process. Signals from the

bipolar HDsEMG were amplified (x2000 or x5000) and digitized at 2048 Hz using a 12-bit A/D

converter (128-channel EMG-USB; OTBioelettronica; –3 dB, bandwidths 10–500 Hz). The same

assessor was responsible for the placement of the grids to minimize variability between

participants. Moderate to good between-day reliability (ICC ranging from 0.604 to 0.978) has been

established for amplitude distribution parameters measured with HDsEMG on low back muscles

(Afsharipour et al. 2016).



Data analysis

HDsEMG data were extracted during the trunk perturbation protocol and the left and right sides

were analyzed separately. Differential signals were calculated from HDsEMG by subtracting

consecutive monopolar signals along the cranio-caudal direction (Figure 2). Consequently, the final

grid consisted of a 7x8 channels. Each HDsEMG signal obtained from both grids were digitally

band-pass filtered in the frequency bandwidth 20-400 Hz (4th order Butterworth filter). Notch filters

were also applied to eliminate the 60 Hz power line interference (2 nd order Butterworth filter) and

its harmonics. Electrodes with contact problems were identified through visual inspection of the raw

HDsEMG signals and were reconstructed by interpolation of the neighbouring electrodes. If these

electrode artifacts were excessive (>10%), the recording was discarded from the analysis (Gallina

et al. 2022). Dependent variables were computed for all trials (x10) of each posture (x3). Baseline

muscle activation corresponded to the mean root mean square (RMS) across channel, calculated

in a 500 ms window before the perturbation onset. Response latency corresponded to the time (in


                                                                                                   7
milliseconds) between perturbation onset and EMG response onset. This variable was only used

to identify perturbation onset and then to compute EMG response amplitude. To compute the onset

of the EMG response, rectified differential HDsEMG signals were low-pass filtered (Butterworth 6th

order, dual-pass zero-lag, 50 Hz cutoff frequency) and assessed using a sliding window of 25-ms

(Larivière et al. 2010). EMG response onset occurred when the myoelectric signals exceeded three

SDs above the baseline muscle activity (Hodges and Bui 1996). Responses were considered

voluntary and removed from the analysis when response latency exceeded 200 ms. Response

amplitude was defined as the mean RMS values computed in a 100-ms window centered on the

response peak. Response peak corresponded to the highest RMS value present in a 200-ms

window following the perturbation onset. The medio-lateral and cranio-caudal coordinates of the

centroid were computed to identify the spatial distribution of the lumbar extensor muscle activity at

baseline and in response to the perturbation (Figure 3). To facilitate interpretation of the spatial

coordinates, the right array was flipped along the x-axis, so higher x coordinates mean a more

medial location of the centroid on both sides. The centroid corresponded to the average weighted

position of the channels exhibiting RMS response values higher than 70% of the maximum of all

channels (Vieira et al. 2010). For baseline activation and response amplitude, estimates across

channels higher than 70% of the maximum of all channels were averaged, resulting in a single

estimate for each side. For all dependent variables, the mean of the perturbation trials of each

posture was considered for the statistical analysis. All data analyses were performed in Matlab

(2020a version, Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).



Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed with Statistica statistical package version 13 (TIBCO Software

Inc, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Parametric tests were chosen based on the normality of data distribution

(Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and visual inspection). A within-subject two-way repeated-measures

ANOVA was conducted to assess the effect of Posture (neutral, trunk flexion and left trunk rotation),

Side (left and right) and interaction (Posture x Side) on each dependent variable. When significant,

main effects were decomposed using pairwise comparisons with p value corrected for the number


                                                                                                   8
of comparisons using the Bonferroni test. For all statistical analyses, p < 0.05 was considered to

be significant.




Results

EMG data of the right side of one participant was excluded due to many electrodes with contact

problems (>10%). Latencies results for all postures ranged from 74 to 102 milliseconds.



MUSCLE ACTIVATION

All main (Side and Posture) and interaction effect (Side x Posture) results for baseline activity and

response amplitude from the repeated-measure ANOVAs are presented in Table 1 and in Figure

4.

Posture had a significant effect on baseline activity (F(2,36)=110.99 p<0.001). Post-hoc

comparisons revealed a higher baseline activity in Flexion compared to the other two postures

(Bonferroni-corrected p<0.001), but no difference between Neutral and Rotation (Bonferroni-

corrected p=0.352). No interaction (F(2,36)=2.20 p=0.126) was observed.

A significant Side x Posture interaction was observed for muscle activation in response to

perturbation (F(2,36)=4.30, p=0.021). Post-hoc comparisons revealed a higher EMG response for

the right and left side during Flexion compared to the right side during Rotation (Bonferroni-

corrected for right Flexion p<0.001; for left Flexion p=0.006), as well as a higher EMG response in

right Flexion compared to left Neutral posture (Bonferroni-corrected p=0.005). No significant effect

of side (multiple p>0.127) was observed for these two variables.



MEDIO-LATERAL DISTRIBUTION

Centroid results are illustrated in Table 1 and Figures 5 and 6. Posture influenced the medio-lateral

distribution of activation, both at baseline and in response to perturbations.

At baseline, posture had an effect on the medio-lateral centroid coordinates (F(2,36)=17.36,

p<0.001). Post-hoc comparisons revealed a more medial location of the centroid in Flexion

compared to both Neutral (Bonferroni-corrected p=0.003) and Rotation (Bonferroni-corrected

                                                                                                   9
p<0.001) at baseline. An effect of side (F(2,36)=5.09, p=0.037) was also observed, with more lateral

centroid locations on the left compared to the right. No interactions were significant (F(2,36)=2.57,

p=0.090).

In response to the perturbation, an interaction Side x Posture (F(2,36)=8.55, p<0.001) was

identified. The distribution of activation was more lateral on the left compared to the right side during

Rotation (Bonferroni-corrected p<0.001). Post-hoc comparisons revealed a more medial location

of the centroid on the right side in Neutral compared to the Flexion on both sides (Bonferroni-

corrected ps<0.05) and a more medial location of the centroid on both sides in Neutral compared

to the left side in Rotation (Bonferroni-corrected ps<0.001).



CRANIO-CAUDAL DISTRIBUTION

Posture influenced the cranio-caudal distribution of activation, both at baseline and in response to

perturbations.

At baseline, a significant interaction side x posture (F(2,36)=14.30, p<0.001) was observed. The

EMG distribution was located more cranially on the left side than the right side in Rotation

(Bonferroni-corrected p<0.001). Moreover, on the right side, a more caudal location of the centroid

was observed in Rotation compared to Neutral on the right side (Bonferroni-corrected p=0.009)

and on the left side (Bonferroni-corrected p=0.036). The EMG distribution was located more

caudally on the left and right sides in Flexion than the left side in Rotation (Bonferroni-corrected

p=0.014 and p=0.007, respectively). No other post-hoc comparisons were significant (p>0.05).

After perturbation, a significant interaction side x posture (F(2,36)=7.18, p=0.002) was observed.

Post-hoc comparisons revealed a more cranial location of the centroid on the left side in

comparison to the right side in trunk rotation (Bonferroni-corrected p=0.002), whereas other post-

hoc comparisons did not reach significance (p>0.063).



Discussion

In the present study, we investigated the effect of trunk posture on muscle recruitment strategies

during unexpected posterior-anterior trunk perturbations. Regional differences in the distribution of


                                                                                                      10
surface EMG amplitude indicate that different muscle regions were preferentially activated in

isometric contractions and in response to perturbations applied when the trunk is in different

postures. Our results demonstrate that, in response to unexpected postural perturbations, healthy

individuals activate lumbar muscles regionally when forward perturbations are applied in different

trunk postures. This regional activation may be based on the mechanical advantage of regions

within the lumbar extensor muscles.




Using HDsEMG, this study was able to reveal an uneven distribution of muscle activity over the low

back region when assessing responses to trunk perturbations. Together with a large body of

literature that identified uneven activation over the lumbar extensor muscles in a variety of tasks

(Falla et al. 2014; Readi et al. 2015; Ringheim et al. 2019; Serafino et al. 2021), our study further

highlights how recordings from multiple regions of the lumbar extensors may be needed to

accurately represent the activation of these muscles. For instance, since the distribution of

electromyographic amplitude differs between postures, a single bipolar electrode with a small

interelectrode distance may record smaller or larger differences in EMG amplitude between

postures depending on where it is placed. Similarly, the large differences in the cranio-caudal

coordinate of the centroid between left and right during trunk rotation suggest that global muscle

activation estimates from a single bipolar electrode with a small interelectrode distance placed in

the same location on the left and right lumbar extensor muscles may be misleading, since side

differences in EMG amplitude may be related to regional activation as opposed to changes in global

muscle activation. Overall, our findings support the recent consensus papers in electrode selection

that identify HDsEMG as a relevant tool to assess the distribution of activity between regions of a

muscle (Besomi et al. 2019; Gallina et al. 2022).




Trunk flexion postures may result in a mechanical disadvantage while facing unexpected

perturbations. When the trunk is flexed, the moment arm due to gravity increases, which increase

the activation of the erector spinae required to maintain this posture. In addition to this change, the

                                                                                                    11
orientation of the erector spinae muscle fibers in a flexed posture reduces their ability to generate

a great amount of force (Tveit et al. 1994), which increase the risk of spinal instability. Finally, an

increase of the lumbar flexion angle will result in an increase of muscle fiber length, which will also

reduce the production of force as demonstrated by the well-known force-length relation of muscle

(Hill 1953; Malakoutian et al. 2022). Based on these biomechanical reasons, we expected

differences in the neuromuscular strategies used to maintain a flexed trunk posture and resist

perturbations. During the baseline period, which corresponded to 500 milliseconds before the

unexpected perturbation onset, muscle activity was higher in the trunk flexion posture compared to

the neutral posture and trunk rotation. In the trunk flexion posture, participants were asked to bend

forward at 40°. Consequently, a pre-activation of the erector spinae muscle is necessary to maintain

the trunk posture against the gravity and to stabilise the trunk. A previous study has reported a

similar EMG amplitude increase when participants were asked to bend at 20° in similar semi-seated

position (Shahvarpour et al. 2014). In response to the perturbation, a higher response of the erector

spinae was also observed in trunk flexion posture compared to the other postures where the trunk

was upright. In this posture, the moment of the perturbation is added to the moment exerted by the

gravity. Consequently, it could be suggested that the erector spinae muscles need to produce a

higher moment in trunk flexion when facing a perturbation to stabilise the trunk. Regarding the

spatial distribution of muscle activity at baseline, a more medial contribution of the lumbar extensor

muscles was identified bilaterally in the trunk flexion posture. A possible influence of the activation

of superficial multifidus could explain the medial distribution of muscle activity. The medial edge of

the HDsEMG was at one centimetre from the lumbar spinous process and the grids spanned

approximately the entire lumbar region. Based on the anatomy of the lumbar region, the grid would

cover mostly the erector spinae muscles (longissimus) and the superficial multifidus closer to the

spine (Macintosh and Bogduk 1987; Macintosh et al. 1986) which could explain the medial shift of

the muscle activity. Therefore, our current results of more medial distribution of activation suggest

a large contribution of the superficial multifidus during trunk flexion postures, possibly to help

stabilise the trunk isometrically. Interestingly, in response to the perturbation, we observed a more

lateral location of the muscle activity in the trunk flexion posture compared to neutral on both sides.


                                                                                                    12
This finding suggests that, compared to when the trunk is in neutral posture, the erector spinae

muscle is preferentially recruited to resist the trunk perturbation. Biomechanically these different

activation strategies observed during trunk flexion (medial muscle regions when maintaining

posture, lateral muscle regions in response to perturbations) may be associated with the different

biomechanical function of muscles within the lumbar extensors, i.e., spinal stabilisation for

multifidus, response to postural perturbations due to a larger moment arm for the erector spinae.

However, since the trunk flexion posture induced a consistent increase in muscle activation at

baseline, it is not possible to determine whether these different strategies are associated to the

trunk posture, or to the large muscle activation at baseline.




During a left trunk rotation, a higher muscle activity amplitude on the left side has been reported in

the upper lumbar spinal levels compared to the lower levels (Abboud et al. 2020). Moreover, it has

been reported that the erector spinae (longissimus and iliocostalis) have a higher moment arm in

the upper lumbar and thoracic regions because the distance between the middle of the muscle and

the intervertebral disc increase when moving to upper spinal levels (McGill et al. 1993). Therefore,

we could expect that the central nervous system prioritizes the activation of the lumbar region with

the highest mechanical advantage to stabilise the trunk. While previous studies have reported a

higher ipsilateral lumbar muscle activation compared to contralateral muscles during isometric

voluntary trunk rotation against resistance (Kumar et al. 2001; Ng et al. 2001), in this study trunk

rotation did not result in differences between sides at baseline or in response to the perturbation.

The lack of significant differences in EMG amplitude at baseline in this study could be due to the

fact that the participants did not perform a trunk rotation against resistance, but rather performed a

20% MVIC trunk flexion with their trunk in a rotated posture, and therefore it could be argued that

the muscle demand to maintain the trunk rotation was minimal in comparison to the trunk flexion

demand. Importantly, since the EMG amplitude at baseline was not different between side,

differences in the baseline intensity of activation cannot explain the different neuromuscular

strategies observed when perturbations were applied during trunk rotation. Regarding the

distribution of activity between muscle regions, the present study revealed a more cranial

                                                                                                   13
contribution of the lumbar extensor muscles on the left side during ipsilateral trunk rotation posture

at baseline. Conversely, a more caudal location of the centroid was reported on the right side

compared to the neutral posture. These cranio-caudal differences in the spatial distribution of

activation, as well as a more lateral activation on the left compared to the right lumbar extensors,

were also maintained in response to perturbations in the trunk rotation posture. Overall, these

observations support the notion that the lumbar muscle region with the highest mechanical

advantage is preferentially recruited when trunk postural control is challenged. Specifically, a 30-

degree trunk rotation to the left may have placed the left erector spinae in a position where it is

more aligned with the sagittal plane, and therefore mechanically more efficient to oppose a

posterior-anterior perturbation. Since more cranial regions of the lumbar erector spinae have a

better moment arm due to a larger distance from the intervertebral disc (McGill et al. 1993), a

preferential activation of this region may be more effective to oppose forward-directed

perturbations. Instead, left trunk rotation may have increased the angle between the right erector

spinae line of action and the sagittal plane, making this muscle a less optimal choice to produce

force to oppose posterior-anterior perturbations. Because of this, distal regions within the lumbar

extensors may have been recruited to assist with spinal stabilisation. Further, our data suggest that

the main neuromuscular strategies to oppose forward-directed perturbations when the trunk is

rotated compared to neutral posture involve regional redistribution of activity without consistent

changes in global muscle activation intensity.

In response to the perturbation, the EMG distribution was more lateral on the left compared to the

right side in the trunk rotation posture, and on the left side it was more lateral in the trunk rotation

posture compared to the neutral posture. This neuromuscular activation strategy, possibly

representing a preferential contribution of the erector spinae, was similar to that observed in the

trunk flexion posture. Since the erector spinae muscles are the main contributor to the trunk

extension because of their larger size (McGill et al. 1993), these data suggest that that the central

nervous system preferentially recruits the erector spinae over the superficial multifidus to oppose

a trunk perturbation when the trunk is flexed or rotated, compared to when it is in neutral posture.

It should be noted that, even if the centroid migration of muscle activity could be considered small,


                                                                                                     14
it is likely to still be relevant from a physiological point of view since muscle fibers even just one

centimeter apart could for instance insert on different vertebrae. The shift of muscle activity

observed in this study is larger than that observed during trunk loading task (Tucker et al. 2009),

and similar to the difference in average distribution observed when comparing individuals with and

without low back pain (e.g., (Falla et al. 2014)). Overall, these observations suggest that the

recruitment of motor units of the erector spinae muscles are dependent on posture, possibly

because different postures modify the mechanical advantage of the erector spinae.




Typically, motor units are recruited according to Henneman’s size principle, i.e. from the smallest

motor units to the largest (Henneman 1981). Such recruitment strategy has important physiological

benefits, such as minimizing the amount of muscle fatigue. More recently, the neuromechanical

principle was superimposed to the size principle to explain motor unit recruitment (Butler and

Gandevia 2008; Hudson et al. 2019). This new principle states that motor units are recruited

according to a mechanical advantage during complex tasks where joint angle and fiber orientation

varies, such as superficial lumbar muscles in trunk flexion (Harriss and Brown 2015), as well as

intersegmental movements of the spine (McGill 2015). In the current study, we showed that the

location of the erector spinae muscle activity varied according to the trunk orientation. Although

mechanical advantage was not directly assessed in this study, changes in the mechanical

effectiveness of regions within the lumbar muscles due to trunk posture are a plausible explanation

for the observed differences in regional activation, both at baseline and in response to

perturbations. The results of the current study have improved our understanding on how the lumbar

muscles adapts to challenging trunk postures, demonstrating that the central nervous system can

finely tune with region of the erector spinae is recruited in response to perturbations applied when

the trunk is in different postures. These findings could provide some guidance for perturbation-

based exercises used in prevention and rehabilitation.




                                                                                                   15
The present study has some limitations that should be considered. The main limitation of this study

was that we could not directly estimate the mechanical efficiency of the different muscle regions,

therefore the interpretation of the results is based on the anatomical and biomechanical knowledge

of the lumbar muscles. In the current experiment, a shift of the skin could have occurred, especially

in the 45-degree trunk flexion posture as the lumbar muscle are lengthened. Based on the skin

movement, a shift of the centroid on the cranio-caudal axis during this trunk posture could have

been expected. However, results did not reveal a significant difference of the shift of the centroid

in the cranio-caudal direction between the neutral and trunk flexion posture. The only difference

identified between these two postures was in the medio-lateral coordinates of the centroid, which

is unlikely to be explained by shift of the muscle relative to the skin. Therefore, even if the current

study did not control for skin movement, it could be argued that it had negligible or no impact on

centroid results. Also, the small sample size could increase the risk of statistical error. However,

the main and interaction effects were highly significant which reduce this risk. The interpretation of

the results should also be limited to control postural tasks which may not be as representative as

real-life postural tasks. Finally, no direct measure of spinal stability was made in this study which

limit the application of our results to general trunk postural control.




In conclusion, the present study shows that healthy individuals activate lumbar muscles regionally

to maintain different trunk postures and to oppose unexpected trunk perturbation, possibly due to

regional differences in the mechanical advantage of the erector spinae in different trunk postures.

Moreover, the regional redistribution of activation observed in this study suggests that the central

nervous system may take advantage of the complexity and flexibility of the trunk system to

maintain stability of the spine even in challenging postures. The next step will be to identify the

erector spinae recruitment strategies under more challenged posture, such as full trunk flexion,

and to assess whether these strategies are conserved in patients with low back pain.




                                                                                                      16
References
Abboud J, Kuo C, Descarreaux M, Blouin JS (2020) Regional activation in the human longissimus
         thoracis pars lumborum muscle J Physiol 598:347-359 doi:10.1113/jp278260
Abboud J, Nougarou F, Lardon A, Dugas C, Descarreaux M (2016) Influence of Lumbar Muscle
         Fatigue on Trunk Adaptations during Sudden External Perturbations Front Hum Neurosci
         10:576 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2016.00576
Afsharipour B, Petracca F, Gasparini M, Merletti R (2016) Spatial distribution of surface EMG on
         trapezius and lumbar muscles of violin and cello players in single note playing J
         Electromyogr Kinesiol 31:144-153 doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2016.10.003
Besomi M et al. (2019) Consensus for experimental design in electromyography (CEDE) project:
         Electrode       selection     matrix     J     Electromyogr        Kinesiol    48:128-144
         doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2019.07.008
Bogduk N (2005) Clinical anatomy of the lumbar spine and sacrum. Elsevier Health Sciences,
Butler JE, Gandevia SC (2008) The output from human inspiratory motoneurone pools J Physiol
         586:1257-1264 doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2007.145789
Dupeyron A, Perrey S, Micallef J-P, Pélissier J (2010) Influence of back muscle fatigue on lumbar
         reflex adaptation during sudden external force perturbations Journal of
         electromyography and kinesiology 20:426-432
Falla D, Gizzi L, Tschapek M, Erlenwein J, Petzke F (2014) Reduced task-induced variations in the
         distribution of activity across back muscle regions in individuals with low back pain Pain
         155:944-953 doi:10.1016/j.pain.2014.01.027
Gallina A et al. (2022) Consensus for experimental design in electromyography (CEDE) project:
         High-density surface electromyography matrix Journal of Electromyography and
         Kinesiology 64:102656 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2022.102656
Harriss AB, Brown SH (2015) Effects of changes in muscle activation level and spine and hip
         posture on erector spinae fiber orientation Muscle & nerve 51:426-433
Henneman E (1981) Recruitment of motoneurons: the size principle Motor unit types, recruitment
         and plasticity in health and disease:26-60
Hill AV (1953) The mechanics of active muscle Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 141:104-117
         doi:10.1098/rspb.1953.0027
Hodges PW, Bui BH (1996) A comparison of computer-based methods for the determination of
         onset of muscle contraction using electromyography Electroencephalogr Clin
         Neurophysiol 101:511-519 doi:10.1016/s0013-4694(96)95190-5
Hodges PW, Coppieters MW, MacDonald D, Cholewicki J (2013) New insight into motor
         adaptation to pain revealed by a combination of modelling and empirical approaches Eur
         J Pain 17:1138-1146 doi:10.1002/j.1532-2149.2013.00286.x
Hudson AL, Gandevia SC, Butler JE (2019) A principle of neuromechanical matching for motor unit
         recruitment in human movement Exercise and sport sciences reviews 47:157-168
Kumar S, Narayan Y, Garand D (2001) Isometric axial rotation of the trunk in the neutral posture
         Eur J Appl Physiol 86:53-61 doi:10.1007/s004210100510
Larivière C, Forget R, Vadeboncoeur R, Bilodeau M, Mecheri H (2010) The effect of sex and chronic
         low back pain on back muscle reflex responses Eur J Appl Physiol 109:577-590
         doi:10.1007/s00421-010-1389-7
Macintosh JE, Bogduk N (1987) 1987 Volvo award in basic science. The morphology of the lumbar
         erector spinae Spine 12:658-668 doi:10.1097/00007632-198709000-00004
Macintosh JE, Valencia F, Bogduk N, Munro RR (1986) The morphology of the human lumbar
         multifidus Clinical biomechanics 1:196-204


                                                                                                17
Malakoutian M, Sanchez CA, Brown SHM, Street J, Fels S, Oxland TR (2022) Biomechanical
         Properties of Paraspinal Muscles Influence Spinal Loading-A Musculoskeletal Simulation
         Study Front Bioeng Biotechnol 10:852201 doi:10.3389/fbioe.2022.852201
McGill S (2015) Low back disorders: evidence-based prevention and rehabilitation. Human
         Kinetics,
McGill SM, Hughson RL, Parks K (2000) Changes in lumbar lordosis modify the role of the extensor
         muscles Clinical biomechanics 15:777-780
McGill SM, Santaguida L, Stevens J (1993) Measurement of the trunk musculature from T5 to L5
         using MRI scans of 15 young males corrected for muscle fibre orientation Clin Biomech
         (Bristol, Avon) 8:171-178 doi:10.1016/0268-0033(93)90011-6
Ng JK, Parnianpour M, Richardson CA, Kippers V (2001) Functional roles of abdominal and back
         muscles during isometric axial rotation of the trunk J Orthop Res 19:463-471
         doi:10.1016/s0736-0266(00)90027-5
Park RJ, Tsao H, Cresswell AG, Hodges PW (2014) Anticipatory postural activity of the deep trunk
         muscles differs between anatomical regions based on their mechanical advantage
         Neuroscience 261:161-172 doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.037
Pruszynski JA, Scott SH (2012) Optimal feedback control and the long-latency stretch response
         Exp Brain Res 218:341-359 doi:10.1007/s00221-012-3041-8
Radebold A, Cholewicki J, Panjabi MM, Patel TC (2000) Muscle response pattern to sudden trunk
         loading in healthy individuals and in patients with chronic low back pain Spine 25:947-954
Readi NG, Rosso V, Rainoldi A, Vieira TM (2015) Do sweep rowers symmetrically activate their low
         back muscles during indoor rowing? Scand J Med Sci Sports 25:e339-352
         doi:10.1111/sms.12319
Ringheim I, Indahl A, Roeleveld K (2019) Reduced muscle activity variability in lumbar extensor
         muscles during sustained sitting in individuals with chronic low back pain PLoS One
         14:e0213778 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0213778
Serafino F, Trucco M, Occhionero A, Cerone GL, Chiarotto A, Vieira T, Gallina A (2021)
         Understanding regional activation of thoraco-lumbar muscles in chronic low back pain
         and its relationship to clinically relevant domains BMC musculoskeletal disorders 22:1-12
Shahvarpour A, Shirazi-Adl A, Mecheri H, Larivière C (2014) Trunk response to sudden forward
         perturbations - effects of preload and sudden load magnitudes, posture and abdominal
         antagonistic        activation         J      Electromyogr       Kinesiol       24:394-403
         doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2014.03.007
Todorov E, Jordan MI (2002) Optimal feedback control as a theory of motor coordination Nature
         neuroscience 5:1226-1235
Tucker K, Falla D, Graven-Nielsen T, Farina D (2009) Electromyographic mapping of the erector
         spinae muscle with varying load and during sustained contraction J Electromyogr Kinesiol
         19:373-379 doi:10.1016/j.jelekin.2007.10.003
Tveit P, Daggfeldt K, Hetland S, Thorstensson A (1994) Erector spinae lever arm length variations
         with changes in spinal curvature Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 19:199-204 doi:10.1097/00007632-
         199401001-00015
Vieira TM, Merletti R, Mesin L (2010) Automatic segmentation of surface EMG images: Improving
         the     estimation     of     neuromuscular       activity   J   Biomech     43:2149-2158
         doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.03.049




                                                                                                18
Legends for illustrations and tables


Table 1. Effect of Side and Trunk Posture on lumbar muscle activation and centroid location. When
significant, post-hoc are described bellow the main effects p value.


Figure 1. Illustration of the trunk perturbation protocols in three different postures: neutral (top
figure), trunk flexion (bottom left figure) and trunk rotation (bottom right figure).


Figure 2. Organisation and position of the high-density surface EMG. Examples of EMG recordings
for each Posture on the left and right side. The vertical grey line represents the perturbation onset.
To calculate the centroid activation, the number of columns on the right grid has been mirrored so
that for both grids higher values represent more medial activation. Each number corresponds to a
differential signal. Data from a single participant.


Figure 3. Mapping of the distribution of muscle activity during the perturbation response. The white
cross markers correspond to the location of the centroid. Data from a single participant.


Figure 4. Representation of the average normalized mean muscle activity amplitude at baseline
and in response to the perturbation of channels higher than 70% of the maximum of all channels.
Blue traces illustrate the Neutral Posture, red traces illustrate the Flexion Posture and black traces
illustrate the Rotation Posture. The dashed vertical line represents the perturbation onset.


Figure 5. Medio-lateral and cranio-caudal coordinates of the centroid locations. The graphs depict
means (filled circles), standard deviations and black circles identify responses from individual
participants. N: Neutral posture F: Trunk Flexion posture; R: Trunk Rotation posture; l: left side; r:
right side.


Figure 6. Spatial representation of the centroid locations at baseline (dashed lines) and in response
to the perturbation (solid lines). Circles represent the mean locations and bars represent the
standard deviations. Blue traces illustrate the Neutral Posture, red traces illustrate the Flexion
Posture and black traces illustrate the Rotation Posture. C: channel.




                                                                                                   19
