Articles in PresS. J Appl Physiol (November 12, 2004). doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00632.2004

                                                                       JAP-00632-2004 R2




        INTERACTION BETWEEN THE CANINE DIAPHRAGM AND

               INTERCOSTAL MUSCLES IN LUNG EXPANSION




                                      André De Troyer




 Laboratory of Cardiorespiratory Physiology, Brussels School of Medicine ; and Chest

 Service, Erasme University Hospital, 1070 Brussels, Belgium




 Running Head : Diaphragm- intercostal interaction on the lung



 Keywords : Mechanics of breathing ; respiratory muscles




 Address for correspondence André De Troyer, M.D.
                            Chest Service
                            Erasme University Hospital
                            Route de Lennik, 808
                            1070 Brussels Belgium


 Phone: (322) 555-3986          Fax :(322) 555-4411        E-mail: a_detroyer@yahoo.fr




                   Copyright © 2004 by the American Physiological Society.
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2


ABSTRACT


       The changes in intrathoracic pressure produced by the various inspiratory intercostals
are essentially additive, but the interaction between these muscles and the diaphragm remains
uncertain. In the present study, this interaction was assessed by measuring the changes in
airway opening (Pao) or transpulmonary (Ptp) pressure in vagotomized, phrenicotomized
dogs during spontaneous inspiration (isolated intercostal contraction), during isolated
rectangular or ramp stimulation of the peripheral ends of the transected C5 phrenic nerve roots
(isolated diaphragm contraction), and during spontaneous inspiration with superimposed
phrenic nerve stimulation (combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction). With the
endotracheal tube occluded at FRC, Pao during combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction
was nearly equal to the sum of the Pao’s produced by the two muscle groups contracting
individually. However, when the endotracheal tube was kept open, Ptp during combined
contraction was 123 % of the sum of the individual Ptp’s (P<0.001). The increase in lung
volume during combined contraction was also 109 % of the sum of the individual volume
increases (P<0.02). Abdominal pressure during combined contraction was invariably lower
than during isolated diaphragm contraction. It is concluded, therefore, that the canine
diaphragm and intercostal muscles act synergistically during lung expansion and that this
synergism is primarily due to the fact that the intercostal muscles reduce shortening of the
diaphragm. When the lung is maintained at FRC, however, the synergism is obscured because
the greater stiffness of the rib cage during diaphragm contraction enhances the Pao produced
by the isolated diaphragm and reduces the Pao produced by the intercostal muscles.




                                                                                                1
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2


INTRODUCTION


       It is now well established that the parasternal and external intercostal muscles contract
during the inspiratory phase of the breathing cycle and that the changes in intrathoracic
pressure generated by these muscles are essentially additive (2, 29). Thus, when the
endotracheal tube in dogs is occluded at resting end-expiration (functional residual capacity,
FRC) and the parasternal intercostals or the external intercostals are selectively activated by
electrical stimulation, the change in airway opening pressure ( Pao) produced by the
simultaneous, bilateral contraction of the muscles in two interspaces is nearly equal to the
sum of the Pao’s observed during bilateral contraction of the muscles in each individual
interspace (29). The Pao produced by the simultaneous contraction of the parasternal or
external intercostals in one or two interspaces on the left and right sides of the sternum is also
nearly equal to the sum of the Pao’s produced by separate left and right contraction (2). On
the other hand, Di Marco et al. (18) have previously reported that the Pao obtained during
simultaneous contraction of the canine diaphragm and intercostal muscles at FRC was 17
percent greater than the sum of the Pao’s resulting from their separate contraction. In
addition, although the diaphragm and the parasternal intercostals were observed to shorten
during both simultaneous and separate stimulation, both muscles shortened less in the first
instance than in the second. Di Marco et al. (18) concluded, therefore, that the interaction
between the diaphragm and the inspiratory intercostals is synergistic, and they further
concluded that this synergism is largely related to the length-tension characteristics of the
muscles, an intercostal muscle contraction in particular leading to an increase in
diaphragmatic muscle length and, hence, to an increase in diaphragmatic force.


       The technique used by these investigators to activate the inspiratory intercostal
muscles and to obtain a quantitative assessment of the diaphragm-intercostal interaction,
however, was not optimal. Indeed, the intercostal muscles were stimulated by applying
rectangular trains of square pulses through an electrode positioned in the epidural space while
the diaphragm was stimulated by applying trains of similar pulses to the phrenic nerves in the
neck. The precise mechanism of muscle activation by an epidural electrode remains uncertain,
so the intensity and extent of intercostal activation during isolated stimulation may be
different from that during simultaneous intercostal-diaphragm stimulation. More importantly,
the epidural electrode does not reproduce the topographic gradients of parasternal and


                                                                                                  2
                                                                            JAP-00632-2004 R2

external intercostal activity that occur during spontaneous breathing (15, 20, 25, 27, 28).
Instead, it induces a forceful and uniform activation of the muscles over a very large fraction
of the rib cage. This technique also elicits strong contraction of all the expiratory muscles of
the rib cage, including the triangularis sterni, as well as a number of muscles that, in the dog,
are not involved in the act of breathing, such as the internal intercostals in the cranial
interspaces, the serratii, the pectoralis, the scalenes and the sternomastoids.


       These problems prompted us to reevaluate the interaction between the canine
diaphragm and inspiratory intercostal muscles. The phrenic nerves in each animal were
sectioned in the neck to induce a complete paralysis of the diaphragm, and the animals were
breathing spontaneously. Consequently, only the inspiratory intercostals were activated, and
the normal topographic distribution of neural drive to these muscles was maintained. Also, the
diaphragm in a first series of experiments was activated by applying rectangular pulses to the
distal ends of the phrenic nerves, but in a second series of experiments, the nerves were given
ramp stimulations so as to reproduce more closely the pattern of diaphragmatic and
inspiratory intercostal activation during breathing. With the endotracheal tube occluded at
FRC, Pao during simultaneous diaphragm-intercostal contraction was found in both
experiments to be nearly the same as the sum of the Pao’s generated by the two sets of
muscles individually. It was concluded, therefore, that separate contraction of the two muscles
involves one or several mechanisms that compensate for the beneficial effect of the
intercostals on the pressure-generating ability of the diaphragm, and the hypothesis was raised
that these mechanisms are related to alterations in rib cage compliance during airway
occlusion. This hypothesis was finally tested by examining the diaphragm-intercostal
interaction during unimpeded breathing.


METHODS


       Twenty-five adult mongrel dogs (13-38 kg) anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(initial dose, 30 mg kg-1 I. V.) were studied as approved by the Animal Ethics and Welfare
Committee of the Brussels School of Medicine. The animals were placed in the supine
posture and intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube, and a venous catheter was inserted in
the forelimb to give maintenance doses of anesthetic. The rib cage and intercostal muscles
were exposed on the right side of the chest from the first to tenth rib by deflection of the skin



                                                                                                    3
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2

and underlying muscle layers, and the abdomen was opened by a midline incision from the
xiphisternum to the umbilicus to insert a balloon-catheter system between the liver and the
stomach. The abdominal wall was then tightly sealed in two layers, after which the vagi and
the C6 and C7 phrenic nerve roots were isolated bilaterally in the neck, infiltrated with 2%
lidocaine (lignocaine) and sectioned. The right and left C5 phrenic nerve roots were also
isolated and sectioned, but their distal ends were laid over two pairs of insulated stainless steel
stimulating electrodes so that the diaphragm could be activated later.


Measurements


       Airway opening pressure (Pao) and abdominal pressure (Pab) were measured in each
animal with differential pressure transducers (Validyne, Northridge, CA) connected,
respectively, to a side port of the endotracheal tube and to the balloon-catheter system placed
in the abdominal cavity ; the abdominal balloon was filled with 1.0 ml of air. The
electromyograms of the parasternal and external intercostal muscles in the third interspace
were recorded with pairs of silver hook electrodes spaced 3-4 mm apart. Each electrode pair
was implanted in parallel fibers in the portion of muscle receiving the greatest neural
inspiratory drive; implantation of the parasternal electrodes, therefore, was made in the
muscle bundles near the sternum (15), and implantation of the external intercostal electrodes
was made in the dorsal portion of the muscle, immediately ventral to the angle of the ribs (20,
25, 28). The two electromyographic (EMG) signals were processed with amplifiers (model
830/1 ; CWE Inc., Ardmore, PA), bandpass filtered below 100 and above 2,000Hz, and
rectified before their passage through leaky integrators with a time constant of 0.2 s.


       Airflow at the endotracheal tube was also measured in each animal with a heated
Fleisch pneumotachograph connected to a differential pressure transducer, and the flow signal
was integrated to assess the changes in lung volume. In addition, in twenty-one animals, the
craniocaudal (axial) motion of the fourth rib was measured by using a linear displacement
transducer (Schaevitz Eng., Pennsauken, NJ), as previously described (13). The animal was
allowed to recover for 30 min after instrumentation, after which measurements of Pao, Pab,
tidal volume, intercostal EMG activity and axial rib motion were made. Three experimental
protocols were then followed.




                                                                                                  4
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2

Protocols


       Experiment 1 : The interaction between the diaphragm and inspiratory intercostal
muscles in the generation of Pao was first studied in ten animals (13-38 kg). The animal was
spontaneously breathing room air, and every five to ten breaths, the inspiratory line of a Hans-
Rudolph valve attached to the tracheal tube was occluded during the expiratory pause for a
single inspiratory effort. Since all phrenic nerve roots were sectioned, these breaths were due
to the isolated contraction of the inspiratory intercostals. In half of these occluded breaths,
however, electrical stimuli were applied to the distal ends of the transected right and left C5
phrenic roots. The stimuli were rectangular trains of square pulses of 0.1 ms duration and
20 Hz frequency with a voltage of 2 V. Indeed, although diaphragmatic compound muscle
action potentials (CMAP) were not recorded in these animals, previous studies using the same
stimulator (model S44, Grass Inst., Quincy, MA) and the same electrodes have shown that
this voltage was well above the threshold current necessary to produce a CMAP of maximal
amplitude (10).


       The investigator received continuous feedback of parasternal intercostal activity via a
loudspeaker, which allowed him to initiate the stimuli together with or shortly after the onset
of intercostal muscle contraction and to maintain the stimuli until the onset of the expiratory
pause. At least ten occluded breaths with phrenic nerve stimulation alternating with ten
occluded breaths without stimulation were recorded in every animal. When these
measurements were completed, the animal was made apneic by mechanical hyperventilation
(Harvard pump, Chicago, IL), the endotracheal tube was occluded at resting end-expiration,
and isolated stimulation of the C5 phrenic roots was performed in triplicate.


       Experiment 2 : We were concerned that the interaction between the diaphragm and
inspiratory intercostals as assessed in Expt 1 might be affected by the difference between the
rectangular pattern of diaphragmatic contraction and the natural, ramp-like pattern of
intercostal muscle contraction. In seven animals (23-37 kg), therefore, the distal ends of the
C5 phrenic nerve roots were stimulated by using another commercially available stimulator
(model MP 16 ; Physitech Elect, Marseille, Fr) that allowed the stimulus frequency to
increase gradually from 10 to 20 Hz during the course of inspiration. As a result, the force
generated by the diaphragm increased progressively and continuously in much the same way



                                                                                                  5
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

as the intercostal muscle force did. The experimental procedure was otherwise similar to that
used in Expt 1.


       Experiment 3: Eight animals (21-31 kg) were finally studied to assess the diaphragm-
intercostal interaction in lung expansion. Two procedures were performed in each animal. The
initial one was identical to that used in Expt 1 and involved measuring Pao during occluded
breaths with the intercostal muscles alone, during occluded breaths with superimposed,
rectangular stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots, and during isolated stimulation of the
phrenic nerve roots. After completion of this procedure, however, a balloon-catheter system
filled with 0.5 ml of air was advanced into the midesophagus to measure pleural pressure
(Ppl), and transpulmonary pressure (Ptp) was obtained with a differential pressure transducer
as the difference between Pao and Ppl (Ptp = Pao – Ppl). The position of the esophageal
balloon was adjusted by using the occlusion technique (1). Measurements of Ptp, tidal
volume, Pab, intercostal EMG activity and rib motion were then made and, as for the initial
procedure, rectangular stimulation (20 Hz, 0.1 ms, 2V) of the C5 phrenic nerve roots was
superimposed on intercostal muscle contraction at intervals. In contrast to the initial
procedure, however, the endotracheal tube was maintained open throughout. At least ten
breaths with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation were obtained in each animal. When the
measurements were completed, the animal was made apneic and isolated phrenic nerve
stimulation was repeated.


       The animals were maintained at a constant, rather deep level of anesthesia throughout
the study. Specifically, they had no pupillary light reflex and no movement other than those
involved in the act of breathing, including during phrenic nerve stimulation. Rectal
temperature was maintained constant between 36 and 38° C with infrared lamps. At the end of
the study, the animal was given an overdose of anesthetic (30-40 mg kg-1).


Data analysis


       In each animal, the changes in Pao and Pab and the axial rib motions obtained at the
peak of the occluded breaths with the intercostal muscles alone (control breaths), during the
occluded breaths with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation (stimulated breaths), and
during isolated phrenic nerve stimulation were averaged over all trials. The mean change in
Pao obtained during the control breaths was then added to the change in Pao obtained during


                                                                                                6
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

isolated phrenic nerve stimulation, and the value thus calculated (it will be referred to here as
the predicted Pao) was compared with the Pao measured during the stimulated breaths.
Similarly, in each animal of Expt 3, the changes in lung volume, Ptp, Pab and the axial rib
motions obtained during the breaths with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation and during
the immediately preceding non-stimulated (control) breaths were averaged over all trials, and
the mean changes in lung volume and Ptp during the stimulated breaths were compared with
the predicted values.


       Phasic inspiratory EMG activity in the parasternal and external intercostal muscles
during the control breaths and the stimulated breaths was quantified by measuring the peak
height of the integrated EMG signal in arbitrary units; these measurements were also
averaged over all trials. However, to allow comparison between the two muscles in the
different animals, the inspiratory EMG activity recorded during the stimulated breaths was
subsequently expressed as a percentage of the activity recorded during the control breaths.


       Data were finally averaged for the animal group, and they are presented as mean ± SE.
Statistical comparisons between the measured and predicted values of Pao, Ptp and lung
volume were made by using paired t-tests; moreover, the linear regression of measured Ptp
on predicted Ptp across the animal group was calculated by using the least squares method.
Statistical assessments of the differences in axial rib motion and intercostal EMG activity
between the stimulated breaths and the control breaths and of the differences in Pab between
the stimulated breaths and isolated phrenic nerve stimulation were also made by paired t-tests.
The criterion for statistical significance was taken as P<0.05.


RESULTS


Diaphragm-intercostal interaction in       Pao during rectangular stimulation (Expt 1)


       A representative example of the traces obtained during an occluded control breath,
during isolated stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots with a rectangular train of square
pulses, and during an occluded breath with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation is shown
in Fig. 1, and the changes in Pao and Pab measured in the ten animals are summarized in
Table 1. As anticipated (13), isolated contraction of the parasternal and external intercostals


                                                                                                    7
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

with the endotracheal tube occluded (Fig. 1A) elicited a cranial displacement of the ribs and a
fall in Pao and Pab. At peak inspiration, the cranial rib motion amounted to 8.7 ± 2.0 mm, and
 Pao and Pab were – 14.3 ± 1.7 and – 5.3 ± 0.6 cm H2O, respectively. In contrast, during
isolated stimulation of the phrenic nerves (Fig. 1B), the fall in Pao was associated with a rise
in Pab and a 6.4 ± 0.6 mm caudal displacement of the ribs. On average, Pao during isolated
phrenic nerve stimulation was similar to that recorded in the control breaths.


        When stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots was superimposed on occluded breaths
(Fig. 1C), eight of ten animals showed an increase in the inspiratory EMG activity recorded
from the external intercostals and six animals had a decrease in the activity recorded from the
parasternal intercostals. Also, the cranial rib motion was markedly reduced in two of six
animals and reversed into a caudal motion in the other four animals. For the animal group, the
peak integrated EMG signal from the external intercostal during the stimulated breaths thus
amounted to 120.7 ± 5.3 percent of that measured during the control breaths (P<0.01), the
peak parasternal EMG signal was 95.2 ± 2.3 percent (P = 0.06), and rib motion at peak
inspiration was – 1.6 ± 1.5 mm (P<0.001).


        The rise in Pab observed during the stimulated breaths was much smaller than that
measured during isolated phrenic nerve stimulation in every animal (P<0.001). However, as
shown in Fig. 2, the Pao values recorded during these breaths were nearly the same as the
predicted values. In fact, the measured Pao was slightly greater than the predicted value in
seven of ten animals, but it was similar to the predicted value in one animal and smaller than
the predicted value in two animals. As a result, the difference between the measured Pao
(- 31.5 ± 2.6 cm H2O) and the predicted Pao (- 30.5 ± 2.5 cm H2O) for the animal group was
not statistically significant (P = 0.4).


Diaphragm-intercostal interaction in       Pao during ramp stimulation (Expt 2)


        Figure 3 shows the records obtained during an occluded control breath, during isolated
ramp stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots, and during an occluded breath with
superimposed ramp stimulation of the phrenic nerves in a representative animal. Isolated
ramp stimulation of the phrenic nerves induced progressive, rather than abrupt changes in Pao
and Pab and caused progressive caudal rib motion (Fig. 3B). The changes in pressure


                                                                                                   8
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2

recorded at peak stimulation, however, were nearly the same as those obtained with
rectangular stimulation (Table 1), and the caudal rib motion similarly averaged 5.7 ± 1.5 mm.


       Superimposing such stimulations to occluded breaths also produced essentially similar
results as rectangular stimulations. Thus, relative to the control breaths, external intercostal
EMG activity increased to 125.4 ± 15.0 percent (P = 0.14), parasternal intercostal activity
decreased to 92.6 ± 2.4 percent (P < 0.05), and the cranial rib motion decreased markedly
from 10.5 ± 0.9 to 1.9 ± 2.2 mm (P<0.001). Also, Pab during the stimulated breaths was
consistently smaller than during isolated phrenic nerve stimulation (P< 0.001), and the
measured Pao was greater than the predicted value in only four of seven animals (Fig. 2).
For the animal group, therefore, the difference between the measured Pao (- 29.5 ± 3.3
cm H2O) and the predicted value (- 27.7 ± 3.7 cm H2O) did not reach the level of statistical
significance (P = 0.15).


Diaphragm-intercostal interaction in lung expansion (Expt 3)


       The records obtained in a representative animal with the endotracheal tube open are
shown in Fig. 4, and the pressure changes measured in the eight animals both with the tube
open and the tube occluded are summarized in Table 2. Opening the endotracheal tube
attenuated the response of parasternal and external intercostals to phrenic stimulation but did
not fundamentally alter it. Thus, with the airway occluded, parasternal and external intercostal
inspiratory activity during the stimulated breaths was, respectively, 94.6 ± 2.0 and 126.8 ±
10.8 percent of the activity measured during the control breaths (P< 0.05 for both); similarly,
with the airway open, parasternal and external intercostal activity during the stimulated
breaths was 97.9 ± 1.2 and 117.4 ± 12.1 percent, respectively (NS). Also, whether the airway
was open or occluded, the rise in Pab during the stimulated breaths was significantly smaller
(P< 0.01) than that during isolated phrenic nerve stimulation (Table 2).


       However, although the ribs moved caudally during isolated phrenic nerve stimulation
both with the airway open and with the airway occluded, this motion was much smaller with
the airway open (- 1.5 ± 0.4 vs – 4.7 ± 1.3 mm; P<0.02). Consequently, whereas the ribs
moved 1.6 ± 1.4 mm caudally during the stimulated breaths with the airway occluded, with
the airway open they moved 7.0 ± 1.4 mm cranially (P< 0.01). In addition, whereas the


                                                                                                   9
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2

measured Pao (airway occluded) was similar to the predicted value in two of the eight
animals and smaller than the predicted value in two animals, the measured Ptp (airway
open) was greater than the predicted value in every animal (Fig. 5). As a result, the measured
 Pao for the animal group was only 103.9 ± 2.6 percent of the predicted value (NS), but the
measured Ptp amounted to 122.7 ± 4.2 percent of the predicted value (P<0.001). The
measured Ptp was closely related to the predicted Ptp (r = 0.946; P<0.001), and the slope
of the linear relationship was 1.23. The increase in lung volume during the stimulated breaths
(692 ± 81 ml) was also greater than the predicted value (635 ± 68 ml; P<0.05).


DISCUSSION


         Studies of the mechanics of the diaphragm in animals (23, 24, 31-33) and in humans
(7, 34) have clearly established that the pressure obtained in response to a given stimulation of
the phrenic nerves decreases rapidly as lung volume is passively increased above functional
residual capacity. Conversely, pressure increases as lung volume decreases toward residual
volume. This influence of lung volume on the pressure-generating ability of the diaphragm is
primarily determined by muscle length, an increase in lung volume leading to a decrease in
muscle length and vice-versa. Although we did not measure diaphragmatic muscle length in
the current study, our animals invariably had a smaller rise in Pab when phrenic nerve
stimulation was superimposed on intercostal muscle contraction than when stimulation was
performed in isolation. This suggests, in agreement with the measurements of Di Marco et al.
(18), that the diaphragm in our animals was longer in the first instance than in the second.
Consequently, it would be expected that its pressure-generating ability would be greater. In
addition, although the effect of diaphragmatic contraction on the pressure-generating ability
of the inspiratory intercostals is unknown, it would also be expected that the change in
intrathoracic pressure during combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction would be greater
than the sum of the pressure changes produced by the two sets of muscles contracting
individually.


         In agreement with this prediction, the Ptp measured during combined diaphragm-
intercostal contraction with the airway open (Expt 3) was, on average, 123 percent of the sum
of the    Ptp’s produced by the muscles during separate contraction (Fig. 5B). The measured
 Ptp was also closely related to the predicted value across the animal group, and the slope of


                                                                                                10
                                                                            JAP-00632-2004 R2

the linear relationship was 1.23, thus confirming that the average increase was 23 percent. In
addition, because of the sigmoid shape of the pressure-volume curve of the lung, such that, at
high lung volumes, large changes in pressure produce only small changes in volume, the
increase in lung volume during combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction would be
expected to be hardly greater or to be smaller than the sum of the increases in lung volume
produced by the two muscles contracting separately. To the extent that our animals had
complete paralysis of the diaphragm and so breathed most of the time with the intercostal
muscles alone, lung expansion could be further limited. Indeed, there is ample evidence,
beginning with the work in dogs by Mead and Collier (30), that breathing at a small constant
tidal volume is associated with an increase in the surface tension of the alveolar lining layer
and with the development of atelectasis and thereby leads to a decrease in pulmonary
compliance (35, 37). Yet, in spite of these confounding factors, the increase in lung volume
during combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction was 109 percent of the sum of the
individual increases in lung volume. The conclusion must be drawn, therefore, that the
diaphragm and inspiratory intercostals do act synergistically on the lung during breathing.


       However, when the airway was occluded at FRC,           Pao during combined diaphragm-
intercostal contraction was nearly equal to the sum of the      Pao’s produced by the two
muscles during separate contraction (Figs. 2 and 5A). This result was obtained with both
rectangular and ramp stimulation of the phrenic nerves, thus indicating that the pattern of
diaphragmatic contraction was not a determining factor. If the diaphragm and inspiratory
intercostals were activated equally during combined and separate contraction, one would
therefore conclude that one or several mechanisms act to reduce or eliminate the synergism
when lung volume is held constant at FRC.


       Activating the diaphragm through electrical stimulation of the phrenic nerves ensured
that the neural input to the muscles during combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction was
exactly the same as that during isolated contraction. In the dog, however, phrenic nerve
afferents originating from diaphragmatic tension receptors are known to elicit powerful reflex
inhibition of the inspiratory intercostals, in particular the external intercostals (10, 11). To
avoid this reflex inhibition in our animals, we thus sectioned all phrenic afferent fibers and so
applied the stimuli only to the long C5 roots. When activated, therefore, the diaphragm
contracted predominantly in its ventral portion (4, 16, 19, 26) and produced a       Pao
representing ~ 30 percent of the pressure obtained during a maximal, isolated stimulation of


                                                                                                   11
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2

the whole muscle (12, 18, 36). And indeed, during the stimulated breaths with the airway
occluded, no decrease in external intercostal EMG occurred. Instead, external intercostal
activity increased 20 to 30 percent relative to the control breaths.


        Previous studies in dogs have shown that external intercostal inspiratory activity is
very sensitive to the magnitude of the inspiratory cranial displacement of the ribs (8). Thus,
when the cranial rib displacement is enhanced by an external force, external intercostal
activity decreases; this decrease is primarily the result of a reduction in spindle afferent
inputs, but mechanoreceptors in the costovertebral joints, as described by Godwin-Austen
(21) in the cat, could also be involved (9). Conversely, when the normal inspiratory cranial
displacement of the ribs is reduced by an external, caudally-oriented force, external intercostal
activity shows a reflex increase. To the extent that the stimulated breaths with the airway
occluded caused a marked reduction in the inspiratory cranial displacement of the ribs (Fig. 3)
or reversed this cranial displacement into a caudal displacement, the increase in external
intercostal activity can therefore be understood. This increase, however, cannot account for
the lack of synergism between the diaphragm and inspiratory intercostals in this condition.
Indeed, should this alteration have a mechanical effect, it would induce an increase, rather
than a decrease in the measured Pao relative to the predicted value.


       On the other hand, the stimulated breaths with the airway occluded were commonly
associated with a decrease in parasternal intercostal activity, and this might cause a reduction
in the measured Pao relative to the predicted value. It seems unlikely, however, that the
decrease in parasternal intercostal activity played any significant role for two reasons. First,
the decrease amounted, on average, to only 5-7 percent of the activity recorded in the control
breaths, and ten of the twenty-five animals of the study showed no decrease at all. In these
animals, parasternal EMG activity during the stimulated breaths thus averaged 100.1 ± 0.8
percent of control and external intercostal activity was 111.2 ± 5.6 percent, yet, as for the
entire animal group, the measured Pao was also nearly identical to the predicted value (-
25.3 ± 1.8 vs - 24.8 ± 2.1 cm H2O). Second, a small decrease in parasternal activity also
occurred during the stimulated breaths with the airway open, but the measured Ptp was
invariably and substantially higher than the predicted value. This suggests that the mechanism
responsible for the lack of synergism during airway occlusion at FRC does not result from
alterations in the activation of the muscles but relates instead to the mechanical properties of



                                                                                                   12
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

the respiratory system. Moreover, the fact that the animals of the study had a bilateral cervical
vagotomy and that the airway was occluded also suggests that the mechanism lies in the
mechanical properties of the chest wall, rather than in the lung.


       In humans, the abdomen becomes less compliant when it expands and the abdominal
muscles are stretched (5, 22). To the extent that the rise in Pab in our animals was much
greater during isolated diaphragmatic contraction than during combined diaphragm-intercostal
contraction, abdominal compliance might therefore be smaller in the first instance than in the
second. However, a similar difference in Pab between isolated diaphragmatic contraction and
combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction was seen when the airway was open (Table 2),
yet a clear-cut synergism was present. Furthermore, the analysis of a two-compartment model
of the chest wall indicates that a stiffening of the abdomen reduces, rather than increases, the
fall in Pao induced by a given diaphragmatic contraction (see Appendix). If the abdomen
were stiffer during isolated diaphragmatic contraction than during combined diaphragm-
intercostal contraction, our predicted values for Pao would therefore be low and the ratio of
the measured to the predicted Pao would be increased.


       On the other hand, isolated diaphragmatic contraction with the airway occluded
induced a large caudal displacement of the ribs in every animal of the study, and it is well
known that the canine rib cage becomes less compliant when it contracts below its resting,
end-expiratory volume (6, 12). Thus, when the airway was occluded in our animals, the rib
cage was stiffer during isolated diaphragmatic contraction than during combined diaphragm-
intercostal contraction, and such a change in compliance should have a dual effect on the
mechanics of the diaphragm. First, a stiffening of the rib cage enhances the fall in Pao
produced by isolated diaphragmatic contraction (12; also see Appendix). Second, a stiffening
of the rib cage also increases the load imposed on the diaphragm and limits its shortening,
such that the pressure-generating ability of the muscle is better maintained (12).
Consequently, the Pao produced by the diaphragm during isolated contraction could be
about the same as that produced by the muscle during combined diaphragm-intercostal
contraction. In addition, previous studies of intercostal muscle action have indicated that in
supine dogs at resting end-expiration, a given force applied to the ribs in the caudal direction
causes a smaller rib displacement than the same force applied in the cranial direction (14, 17).
As a corollary, a given cranially-oriented force applied to the ribs below resting end-



                                                                                                 13
                                                                           JAP-00632-2004 R2

expiration should produce a smaller cranial rib displacement and, with it, a smaller fall in Pao
than if the same force were applied at resting end-expiration. The caudal displacement of the
ribs observed during the stimulated breaths in many animals suggests, therefore, that the Pao
produced by the parasternal and external intercostals may be lower during combined
diaphragm-intercostal contraction than during isolated contraction. The observation that the
diaphragm and intercostal muscles have a synergistic interaction when the airway is kept
open, i.e. when isolated diaphragmatic contraction causes only a small caudal displacement of
the ribs and when combined diaphragm-intercostal contraction is associated with a clear-cut
cranial rib displacement (Fig. 4), is fully consistent with the idea that the decrease in rib cage
compliance plays a major role during airway occlusion.




                                                                                                 14
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2


APPENDIX


       The effects of a decrease in abdominal or rib cage compliance on the Pao produced
by the diaphragm were evaluated with a simple, two-compartment model of the chest wall.
This model was recently developed to analyze the action of the abdominal muscles (3) and is
shown in a simplified form in Fig. 6. The rib cage and abdominal compartments are
represented by the pistons, springs and muscles shown at the top and the bottom of the
cylinder, respectively, and the lung is represented by the spring between the two pistons. If
the volume displacements of the rib cage and abdominal compartments are denoted VR and
VA, the elastances of the compartments are denoted KR and KA, the volume displacement and
the elastance of the lung spring are denoted VL and KL, and the effective pressures exerted by
the rib cage inspiratory muscles and the diaphragm are denoted PR and PA, the equations of
static equilibrium for the two pistons are


                      Pao + PR = KR VR + KL VL                                      (1)
                and Pao + PA = KA VA + KL VL                                        (2)


       The volume displacement of the lung is the sum of the compartmental volume
displacements, so that
                            VL = VR + VA                                            (3)


and substituting for VR and VA from Eqs (1) and (2) yields the following relation


    VL = [ Pao (KR + KA) + PA KR + PR KA – KL VL (KR+ KA) ] / KR KA               (4)


       When the endotracheal tube is occluded, VL = 0 and Eq. (4) yields


                     Pao = - (PA KR + PR KA) / (KR + KA)                            (5)


So, when rib cage inspiratory muscles such as the parasternal and external intercostals
contract alone (PA = 0),


                     Pao = - [ KA / (KR + KA) ] PR                                  (6)



                                                                                                15
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

, and when the diaphragm contracts alone (PR = 0),


                     Pao = - [ KR / (KR + KA) ] PA                                 (7)


       If, for the sake of simplicity, KR in the intact respiratory system is assumed to be equal
to KA , an isolated contraction of the diaphragm would yield Pao = - PA / 2. However, if the
abdomen were stiffer such that KA would be equal to 2 KR , Pao during isolated contraction of
the diaphragm would be only - PA / 3. On the other hand, if the rib cage stiffened such that KR
= 2 KA , Pao during isolated diaphragm contraction would amount to – 2 PA / 3. Thus, a
reduction in abdominal compliance tends to reduce the Pao induced by isolated
diaphragmatic contraction, and a reduction in rib cage compliance tends to enhance it.




                                                                                               16
                                                                      JAP-00632-2004 R2


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


       The author gratefully acknowledges T. A. Wilson for helpful discussions and the
Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS, Belgium) for its financial support (grant
3.4509.04).




                                                                                          17
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2


REFERENCES


1. Baydur A, Behrakis PK, Zin WA, Jaeger M and Milic-Emili J. A simple method for
assessing the validity of the esophageal balloon technique. Amer Rev Respir Dis 126, 788-
791, 1982.
2. Cappello M and De Troyer A. Interaction between left and right intercostal muscles in
airway pressure generation. J Appl Physiol 88: 817-820, 2000.
3. Cappello M and De Troyer A. Role of rib cage elastance in the coupling between the
abdominal muscles and the lung. J Appl Physiol 97: 85-90, 2004.
4. Cardin A. Distribuzione radicolare dei nervi frenici nel diaframma. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper
11: 102-106, 1936.
5. D’Angelo E and Agostoni E. Statics of the Chest Wall. In : The Thorax, 2nd ed., part A, C.
Roussos ed. M. Dekker, Inc. New York, pp. 457-493, 1995.
6. D’Angelo E and Sant’Ambrogio G. Direct action of the contracting diaphragm on the rib
cage in rabbits and dogs. J Appl Physiol 36: 715-719, 1974.
7. Danon J, Druz WS, Goldberg NB and Sharp JT. Function of the isolated paced diaphragm
and the cervical accessory muscles in C1 quadriplegics. Amer Rev Respir Dis 119, 909-919,
1979.
8. De Troyer A. Rib motion modulates inspiratory intercostal activity in dogs. J Physiol 492:
265-275, 1996.
9. De Troyer A. Role of joint receptors in modulation of inspiratory intercostal activity by rib
motion in dogs. J Physiol 503: 445-453, 1997.
10. De Troyer A. The canine phrenic-to-intercostal reflex. J Physiol 508: 919-927, 1998.
11. De Troyer A, Brunko E, Leduc D and Jammes Y. Reflex inhibition of canine inspiratory
intercostals by diaphragmatic tension receptors. J Physiol 514: 255-263, 1999.
12. De Troyer A, Cappello M, Meurant N and Scillia P. Synergism between the canine left
and right hemidiaphragms. J Appl Physiol 94: 1757-1765, 2003.
13. De Troyer A and Kelly S. Chest wall mechanics in dogs with acute diaphragm paralysis.
J Appl Physiol 53: 373-379, 1982.
14. De Troyer A, Kelly S, Macklem PT and Zin WA. Mechanics of intercostal space and
actions of external and internal intercostal muscles. J Clin Invest 75: 850-857, 1985.
15. De Troyer A and Legrand A. Inhomogeneous activation of the parasternal intercostals
during breathing. J Appl Physiol 79, 55-62, 1995.



                                                                                              18
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2

16. De Troyer A, Sampson M, Sigrist S and Macklem PT. Action of costal and crural parts of
the diaphragm on the rib cage in dog. J Appl Physiol 53, 30-39, 1982.
17. De Troyer A and Wilson TA. Coupling between the ribs and the lung in dogs. J Physiol
540: 231-236, 2002.
18. Di Marco A, Supinski GS and Budzinska K. Inspiratory muscle interaction in the
generation of changes in airway pressure. J Appl Physiol 66: 2573-2578, 1989.
19. Fournier M and Sieck GC. Somatotopy in the segmental innervation of the cat diaphragm.
J Appl Physiol 64: 291-298, 1988.
20. Greer JJ and Martin TP. Distribution of muscle fiber types and EMG activity in cat
intercostal muscle. J Appl Physiol 69: 1208-1211, 1990.
21. Godwin-Austen RB. The mechanoreceptors of the costovertebral joints. J Physiol 202:
737-753, 1969.
22. Grimby G, Goldman M and Mead J. Respiratory muscle action inferred from rib cage and
abdominal V-P partitioning. J Appl Physiol 41: 739-751, 1976.
23. Hubmayr RD, Sprung J and Nelson S. Determinants of transdiaphragmatic pressure in
dogs. J Appl Physiol 69: 2050-2056, 1990.
24. Kim MJ, Druz WS, Danon J, Machnach W and Sharp JT. Mechanics of the canine
diaphragm. J Appl Physiol 41: 369-382, 1976.
25. Kirkwood PA, Sears TA, Stagg D and Westgaard RH. The spatial distribution of
synchronisation of intercostal motoneurones in the cat. J Physiol 327: 137-155, 1982.
26. Landau BR, Akert K and Roberts TS. Studies on the innervation of the diaphragm. J
Comp Neurol 119: 1-10, 1962.
27. Legrand A, Brancatisano A, Decramer M and De Troyer A. Rostrocaudal gradient of
electrical activation in the parasternal intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495: 247-254,
1996.
28. Legrand A and De Troyer A. Spatial distribution of external and internal intercostal
activity in dogs. J Physiol 518: 291-300, 1999.
29. Legrand A, Wilson TA and De Troyer A. Rib cage muscle interaction in airway pressure
generation. J Appl Physiol 85: 198-203, 1998.
30. Mead J and Collier C. Relation of volume history of lugs to respiratory mechanics in
anesthetized dogs. J Appl Physiol 14: 669-678, 1959.
31. Minh VD, Dolan GF, Konopka RF and Moser KM. Effect of hyperinflation on inspiratory
function of the diaphragm. J Appl Physiol 40: 67-73, 1976.



                                                                                             19
                                                                       JAP-00632-2004 R2

32. Pengelly LD, Alderson AM and Milic-Emili J. Mechanics of the diaphragm. J Appl
Physiol 30: 797-805, 1971.
33. Road JD, Newman S, Derenne JP and Grassino A. In vivo length-force relationship of
canine diaphragm. J Appl Physiol 58: 1646-1653, 1985.
34. Smith J and Bellemare F. Effect of lung volume on in vivo contraction characteristics of
human diaphragm. J Appl Physiol 62: 1893-1900, 1987.
35. Williams JV, Tierney DF and Parker HR. Surface forces in the lung, atelectasis, and
transpulmonary pressure. J Appl Physiol 21: 819-827, 1966.
36. Wilson TA, Boriek A and Rodarte JR. Mechanical advantage of the canine diaphragm. J
Appl Physiol 85: 2284-2290, 1998.
37. Young SL, Tierney DF and Clements JA. Mechanism of compliance change in excised rat
lungs at low transpulmonary pressure. J Appl Physiol 29: 780-785, 1970.




                                                                                               20
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2


LEGENDS TO FIGURES


Figure 1. Traces of airway opening pressure (Pao), abdominal pressure (Pab), and EMG
activity of the parasternal and external intercostal muscles (third interspace) obtained in a
representative animal during an occluded breath with the intercostal muscles alone (A) ;
during isolated, rectangular stimulation (20 Hz) of the C5 phrenic nerve roots in the neck (B) ;
and during an occluded breath with superimposed stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots
(C). The horizontal dashed line in C corresponds to the Pao that would be obtained at peak
inspiration if the effects of the inspiratory intercostals and diaphragm were perfectly additive.
Note that Pab during the occluded breath with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation is
lower than that during isolated stimulation. Note also that external intercostal EMG activity is
greater during the occluded breath with superimposed stimulation than during the occluded
breath without stimulation.


Figure 2. Comparison between the Pao measured during combined diaphragm-intercostal
contraction and the sum of the Pao’s measured during isolated contraction of the two sets of
muscles (predicted Pao). Individual data obtained in the ten animals of Expt 1, in whom the
phrenic nerves were given rectangular stimulation (closed circles), and in the seven animals of
Expt 2, in whom the nerves were given ramp stimulation (open circles). The solid line is the
line of identity.


Figure 3. Traces obtained in a representative animal during an occluded breath with the
intercostal muscles alone (A) ; during isolated, ramp stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots
(B) ; and during an occluded breath with superimposed ramp stimulation of the phrenic nerve
roots (C). Same conventions as in Fig. 1.


Figure 4. Traces of lung volume, transpulmonary pressure (Ptp), abdominal pressure (Pab),
axial rib motion, and EMG activity of the parasternal and external intercostal muscles
obtained in a representative animal during two breaths with the intercostal muscles alone and
a breath with superimposed, rectangular stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots (A). The
traces obtained during isolated stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots are also shown (B).
The endotracheal tube was open throughout. The horizontal dashed lines in A correspond to




                                                                                                21
                                                                            JAP-00632-2004 R2

the Ptp and the lung volume that would be obtained if the effects of the inspiratory
intercostals and diaphragm on the lung were perfectly additive.


Figure 5. Comparison between the Pao (A) and the Ptp (B) measured during combined
diaphragm-intercostal contraction and the sum of the pressure changes measured during
isolated contraction of the two sets of muscle (predicted). Individual data from eight animals.
The solid line in each panel is the line of identity; the dashed line in B is the linear
relationship between the measured and predicted values of Ptp (r = 0.946; slope, 1.23).


Figure 6 : Diagram of the chest wall. The rib cage and abdominal compartments are
represented by the two pistons at the top and the bottom of the cylinder, respectively, and the
lung is represented by the spring between the two pistons. See text for further explanation.




                                                                                               22
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2

                              TABLE 1 Pressure changes produced by the intercostal muscles and the diaphragm

                                                     during isolated and combined contraction.




                                                       Intercostal muscles   Diaphragm      Intercostal muscles + Diaphragm

Rectangular stimulation of phrenic nerves (Expt 1)

                   Pao (cm H2O)                            - 14.3 (1.7)      - 16.2 (2.2)             - 31.5 (2.6)

                   Pab (cm H2O)                            - 5.3 (0.6)        + 3.7 (0.5)             + 1.4 (0.7)



   Ramp stimulation of phrenic nerves (Expt 2)

                   Pao (cm H2O)                            - 14.8 (2.1)      - 12.9 (2.6)             - 29.5 (3.3)

                   Pab (cm H2O)                            - 5.3 (0.6)        + 3.9 (0.6)             + 0.6 (0.7)



Note : Data are mean (± SE) values obtained in the ten animals of Expt 1 and the seven animals of Expt 2.




                                                                                                                              23
                                                                      JAP-00632-2004 R2

                        TABLE 2 Pressure and volume changes produced by the intercostal muscles and the diaphragm

                                 during isolated and combined contraction with the airway occluded and open.




                                      Intercostal muscles           Diaphragm              Intercostal muscles + diaphragm

         Airway occluded

            Pao (cm H2O)                  - 11.1 (1.5)              - 12.4 (2.0)                     - 23.7 (1.7)

            Pab (cm H2O)                  - 5.6 (0.7)               + 4.3 (0.4)                      + 1.9 (0.6)



            Airway open

            Ptp (cm H2O)                  + 4.0 (0.7)               + 4.0 (0.3)                      + 9.8 (1.0)

            Pab (cm H2O)                  - 3.8 (0.5)               + 4.8 (0.4)                      + 2.9 (0.7)

          lung volume (ml)                  322 (36)                 313 (59)                         692 (81)




Note : Data are mean (± SE) values obtained from the eight animals of Expt 3.




                                                                                                                             24
                                                                          JAP-00632-2004 R2




Figure 1. Traces of airway opening pressure (Pao), abdominal pressure (Pab), and EMG
activity of the parasternal and external intercostal muscles (third interspace) obtained in a
representative animal during an occluded breath with the intercostal muscles alone (A) ;
during isolated, rectangular stimulation (20 Hz) of the C5 phrenic nerve roots in the neck (B) ;
and during an occluded breath with superimposed stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots
(C). The horizontal dashed line in C corresponds to the Pao that would be obtained at peak
inspiration if the effects of the inspiratory intercostals and diaphragm were perfectly additive.
Note that Pab during the occluded breath with superimposed phrenic nerve stimulation is
lower than that during isolated stimulation. Note also that external intercostal EMG activity is
greater during the occluded breath with superimposed stimulation than during the occluded
breath without stimulation.




                                                                                               25
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2




                                -50
         Pao measured (cmH2O)




                                -40



                                -30



                                -20



                                -10



                                 0
                                      0   -10   -20    -30         -40        -50

                                            Pao predicted (cmH2O)


Figure 2. Comparison between the Pao measured during combined diaphragm-intercostal
contraction and the sum of the Pao’s measured during isolated contraction of the two sets of
muscles (predicted Pao). Individual data obtained in the ten animals of Expt 1, in whom the
phrenic nerves were given rectangular stimulation (closed circles), and in the seven animals of
Expt 2, in whom the nerves were given ramp stimulation (open circles). The solid line is the
line of identity.




                                                                                            26
                                                                        JAP-00632-2004 R2




Figure 3. Traces obtained in a representative animal during an occluded breath with the
intercostal muscles alone (A) ; during isolated, ramp stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots
(B) ; and during an occluded breath with superimposed ramp stimulation of the phrenic nerve
roots (C). Same conventions as in Fig. 1.




                                                                                             27
                                                                       JAP-00632-2004 R2




Figure 4. Traces of lung volume, transpulmonary pressure (Ptp), abdominal pressure (Pab),
axial rib motion, and EMG activity of the parasternal and external intercostal muscles
obtained in a representative animal during two breaths with the intercostal muscles alone and
a breath with superimposed, rectangular stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots (A). The
traces obtained during isolated stimulation of the C5 phrenic nerve roots are also shown (B).
The endotracheal tube was open throughout. The horizontal dashed lines in A correspond to
the Ptp and the lung volume that would be obtained if the effects of the inspiratory
intercostals and diaphragm on the lung were perfectly additive.




                                                                                            28
                                                                                                             JAP-00632-2004 R2




             A                                                                  B
                         -40                                                                15
Pao , measured (cmH2O)




                                                                   Ptp , measured (cmH2O)
                         -30
                                                                                            10


                         -20


                                                                                             5
                         -10




                          0                                                                  0
                               0    -10     -20     -30      -40                                 0       5          10         15

                                   Pao , predicted (cmH2O)                                           Ptp , predicted (cmH2O)




Figure 5. Comparison between the Pao (A) and the Ptp (B) measured during combined
diaphragm-intercostal contraction and the sum of the pressure changes measured during
isolated contraction of the two sets of muscle (predicted). Individual data from eight animals.
The solid line in each panel is the line of identity; the dashed line in B is the linear
relationship between the measured and predicted values of Ptp (r = 0.946; slope, 1.23).




                                                                                                                               29
                                                                         JAP-00632-2004 R2




Figure 6 : Diagram of the chest wall. The rib cage and abdominal compartments are
represented by the two pistons at the top and the bottom of the cylinder, respectively, and the
lung is represented by the spring between the two pistons. See text for further explanation.




                                                                                              30
