Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

ANTICIPATORY POSTURAL ACTIVITY OF THE DEEP TRUNK
MUSCLES DIFFERS BETWEEN ANATOMICAL REGIONS BASED ON
THEIR MECHANICAL ADVANTAGE
R. J. PARK, a,b H. TSAO, a A. G. CRESSWELL a,b AND
P. W. HODGES a*

INTRODUCTION
Trunk muscles have complex biomechanics, and regions
within a single trunk muscle can have discrete mechanical
actions on the spine and pelvis. Motor units dispersed
across mechanically unique regions within a single
muscle may be selectively controlled by the nervous
system to meet task demands based on their
mechanical eﬃciency (Gandevia et al., 2006) rather
than recruitment based on the simple ‘size principle’ that
implies smaller motor units will be recruited before
larger units (Henneman, 1957). There is a clear
evidence for functional diﬀerentiation between the
fascicle bundles of the psoas major (PM) and quadratus
lumborum (QL) muscles that may underlie a mechanical
basis for recruitment of motor units across the muscle.
For instance, PM fascicles can generate ﬂexor or
extensor moments at the trunk based on their
orientation relative to the instantaneous axis of rotation
(IAR) of the lumbar segments (Park et al., 2013).
Complicating this relationship is the potential for this
mechanical diﬀerence in function of PM fascicles to vary
as the IAR changes with alteration of spinal curvature
and ﬁbers can change from having a relative ﬂexion to
extension moment (Bogduk et al., 1992). Thus,
diﬀerence in posture would require modiﬁcation of
recruitment of muscle activity between muscle regions
for an otherwise identical task. Such complexity
suggests a high degree of sophistication of control of
the discrete fascicles in these complex muscles. One
method to test the degree to which the higher centers
plan control of the discrete muscle fascicles is to
investigate anticipatory postural adjustments (APAs).
These adjustments are pre-planned by the central
nervous system (CNS), based on the predicted
demands of a future predictable task, such as the
challenge to the spine resulting from the reactive
moments associated with voluntary limb movements. It
is unknown whether the CNS discretely controls the
mechanically unique fascicle regions of complex
multifascicular muscles such as PM and QL as a
component of the APAs.
On the other hand, the potential functional advantage
of discrete control of mechanically unique regions within
one muscle during the APAs may be limited by lateral
transmission of force. Such lateral transmission of force
would limit the potential for discrete fascicles to
generate unique forces (Street, 1983) as much of the
longitudinal force generated by a single muscle ﬁber is

a
The University of Queensland, NHMRC Centre of Clinical
Research Excellence in Spinal Pain, Injury and Health, School
of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia
b

The University of Queensland, Centre for Sensorimotor
Neuroscience, School of Human Movement Studies,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

Abstract—The functional diﬀerentiation between regions of
psoas major (PM) and quadratus lumborum (QL) may underlie a mechanical basis for recruitment of motor units across
the muscle. These mechanically unique fascicle regions of
these complex multifascicular muscles, PM and QL, are
likely to be controlled independently by the central nervous
system (CNS). Fine-wire electrodes recorded the electromyographic activity of the PM fascicles arising from the
transverse process (PM-t) and vertebral body (PM-v) and
the anterior (QL-a) and posterior (QL-p) layers of QL on
the right side during a postural perturbation associated with
rapid arm movements. The ﬁndings of this study indicate
that the CNS coordinates the activity of speciﬁc regions of
PM and QL independently as a component of the anticipatory postural adjustments that precedes the predictable
challenge to the spine associated with limb movements.
The spatial and temporal features of discrete activity of different regions within PM and QL matched their diﬀering
mechanical advantage predicted from their anatomy. These
ﬁndings suggest that the CNS diﬀerentially activates individual regions within complex spine muscles to control
the three-dimensional forces applied to the spine. The data
also point to a sophisticated control of muscle activation
that
appears
based
on
mechanical
advantage.
Ó 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words: lumbar spine, trunk
electromyography, postural control.

muscles,

ﬁne-wire

*Corresponding author. Address: The University of Queensland,
NHMRC Centre of Clinical Research Excellence in Spinal Pain, Injury
and Health, School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia. Tel: +61-7-3365-2008; fax: +61-73365-1284.
E-mail address: p.hodges@uq.edu.au (P. W. Hodges).
Abbreviations: ANOVA, analysis of variance; APAs, anticipatory
postural adjustments; CNS, central nervous system; EMG,
electromyography; ES, erector spinae; IAR, instantaneous axis of
rotation; OE, obliquus externus abdominis; OI, obliquus internus
abdominis; PM, psoas major; QL, quadratus lumborum; RMS, root
mean square; SD, standard deviation; TrA, transversus abdominis.

0306-4522/13 $36.00 Ó 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.12.037
161

162

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

transmitted laterally via the adjacent complex intramuscular connective tissue (Street, 1983; Huijing,
1999). Although lateral transmission could limit the
generation of discrete forces by discrete muscle
fascicles, previous studies have shown diﬀerences in
the timing of activity between fascicle regions in other
muscles such as multiﬁdus (Moseley et al., 2002) and
transversus abdominis (TrA) (Urquhart and Hodges,
2005). A major diﬀerence is that in those muscles the
discrete fascicles generate force in a similar direction,
but with diﬀerent vectors. Thus, variation in temporal
aspects of control of those two fascicles would be
unlikely to be limited by lateral transmission of force. In
contrast, for PM the functions are potentially opposite
(ﬂexion vs. extension) and the eﬀects of lateral
transmission of force may be more problematic. The
CNS could take advantage of the lateral transmission of
force and co-contract the muscle fascicles as a
mechanism to enhance spine stiﬀness.
The ﬁrst aim of this study was to investigate whether
regions within PM with opposite functions are controlled
independently in advance of a predictable challenge to
the spine as a component of the APA. Two alternatives
were considered: the CNS may coordinate diﬀerential
activation of the fascicles within PM based on the
direction of reactive moments at the spine, or the CNS
may co-contract the fascicles to augment spine
stiﬀness. If discrete activity was identiﬁed, a second aim
of the study was to determine whether such activity
(timing and/or amplitude) of regions within a single
muscle with opposite function was consistent with that
predicted by the mechanical demands of the postural
task.
To address these aims, an established paradigm
(Cordo and Nashner, 1982; Bouisset and Zattara, 1987;
Hodges and Richardson, 1997) that challenges
equilibrium of the trunk during a rapid voluntary arm
movement is used. The reactive forces from arm
movement provide a predictable perturbation to the
spine and the CNS initiates APAs that include
preparatory movements of the trunk and pelvis (Zattara
and Bouisset, 1988; Aruin and Latash, 1995; Hodges
et al., 1999, 2000). These movements are matched to
the mechanical demands and occur in all planes (i.e. in
the sagittal, frontal and transverse planes) according to
the direction and side of the unilateral arm movement
(Hodges et al., 2000).

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Participants
Thirteen healthy individuals (nine males and four females)
with a mean (standard deviation, SD) age, height and
weight of 24 (2) years, 170 (6) m, and 64 (13) kg,
participated in this study. Participants were excluded if
they had any major circulatory, orthopedic, neurological
or cardiorespiratory conditions, recent or current
pregnancies, any history of back pain, or previous
surgery to the abdomen or back. All procedures were
approved by the Institutional Medical Research Ethics
Committee at The University of Queensland, and

conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki. Participants
provided written informed consent and few participants
were also involved in another studies (Park et al., 2012,
2013).
Electromyography
A previously established protocol (Park et al., 2012, 2013)
was used to record electromyographic (EMG) activity of
PM-t, PM-v, QL-a and QL-p on the right side at the L3/4
spinal level. Two Teﬂon-coated 75-lm stainless steel wires
(1 mm of Teﬂon removed and bent back to form 1- and
2-mm hooks) were threaded into a hypodermic needle
(0.70  150 mm for PM and 0.65  70 mm for QL), and
inserted into each muscle with ultrasound guidance
(5–10 MHz, Logiq9, GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa, WI).
Preliminary investigation was conducted on cadavers and
ultrasound examination of healthy volunteers to conﬁrm the
anatomy of diﬀerent regions of each muscle. As the ﬁbers
of the middle layer of QL were diﬃcult to isolate from the
other layers, it was not investigated.
Pairs of surface electrodes (Ag/AgCl disks, 10 mm in
diameter, Noraxon, USA) were placed over the anterior
and posterior regions of the deltoid muscles of both
arms. Recordings of typical trunk extensor (erector
spinae [ES]) and ﬂexor/rotator muscles (obliquus
externus abdominis [OE] and obliquus internus
abdominis [OI]) were also made for comparison to assist
interpretation of the function of the regions of PM and
QL. To record from these muscles, surface electrodes
were placed over right ES (2 cm lateral to the L4 spinous
process) and over right OE and OI using electrode
orientations described by Ng et al. (1998). A ground
electrode was placed over the right anterolateral aspect
of the caudal rib cage.
EMG data were ampliﬁed 2000 times, band pass
ﬁltered between 10 Hz and 1.5 kHz using a TeleMyo
telemetered EMG system (Noraxon, Scottsdale, AZ)
and sampled at 2 kHz using a Power1401 Data
Acquisition System with Signal 3 software (Cambridge
Electronic Design, Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Arm movement
Angular displacement of the arm was recorded using a
potentiometer ﬁxed to an upright support. A lightweight
bar was attached to the shaft of the potentiometer and
strapped to the wrist. The axis of rotation of the
potentiometer was aligned with the estimated axis of
rotation for ﬂexion and extension of the glenohumeral
joint. For bilateral arm movements, the bar was
attached to the left arm.
Procedure
Participants stood with feet shoulder-width apart and
arms by their sides in a relaxed manner. They were
instructed to ﬂex or extend the shoulder(s) to 45° from
the horizontal as quickly as possible with the elbow
extended in response to a stimulus light. Red and green
lights were used to cue ﬂexion and extension
movements, respectively. The direction of movement

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

was randomized and 12 repetitions were recorded for
each direction. Arm movements (i.e. ﬂexion and
extension) were performed in separate blocks for
movement of the left, right or both arms. Between 0.5
and 2 s prior to the movement stimulus participants
were given a verbal instruction to stand relaxed. Prior to
data collection, several practice trials were performed
to ensure the correct movement of the arm in response
to the visual stimulus.
Data analysis
Angular displacement data from the potentiometer were
low-pass ﬁltered at 30 Hz (second-order Butterworth).
Angular acceleration of the arm was calculated by
double diﬀerentiation of the arm angular displacement
data and peak acceleration was identiﬁed. Peak
acceleration was used to test whether arm movements
were similar across trials.
EMG data were exported and analyzed using Matlab
7.5 (The Mathworks, Natick, MA). EMG was high-pass
ﬁltered at 30 Hz (fourth-order Butterworth) to remove
any movement artifact. Electrocardiogram was removed
from the EMG data using a modiﬁed turning point ﬁlter
(Aminian et al., 1988).
The onset of anterior and posterior deltoid EMG
(prime mover of the arm) was identiﬁed visually from the
raw EMG data as the point at which activity increased
above baseline. Trials were presented individually
without reference to the direction or side of arm to
remove any potential bias. Root mean square (RMS)
EMG amplitude of trunk muscles was calculated in
twenty 10 ms epochs before (i.e. epoch 20 to 1), and
thirty 10 ms epochs after (i.e. epoch 1 to 30) the onset
of deltoid EMG at zero milliseconds. Throughout the text
each epoch is referred to as its epoch number and the
timeframe, with epoch 0–10 used to refer to the period
from the onset of deltoid EMG to the end of the 10th
millisecond, epoch 10–20 from the end of the 10th
millisecond to the 20th millisecond, and so on. RMS
EMG data were normalized to the peak activity for each
muscle across all trials.
Baseline RMS EMG amplitude was calculated over
500 ms, starting 700 ms before the trigger to provide an
indication of the ongoing activity present when standing
at rest.
Onsets of trunk muscle EMG were identiﬁed from the
epoch data as the ﬁrst epoch in which the EMG activity
deviated (increase or decrease) from background
amplitude. This was determined using a repeatedmeasures analysis of variance ANOVA with epoch used
as a repeated measure. This is a conservative approach
that considers data for all participants and the variation
between individuals. When the activity of trunk muscle
was initiated either before or less than 50 ms after the
onset of the prime mover of the arm (i.e. deltoid EMG),
it was considered to be feedforward. This is because
activity of trunk muscles in response to feedback from
limb movements cannot be initiated within 50 ms from
the onset of prime mover as result of the latency for
nerve conduction and electromechanical delay (Aruin
and Latash, 1995). The time and amplitude of the epoch

163

with the greatest EMG activity (peak EMG) was also
identiﬁed.
To assist with interpretation of the possible function
attributed to each muscle region, muscle activity was
compared to the pattern of activity reported previously
with respect to control of speciﬁc directions of moments
expected at the trunk (Fig. 1). In general, reactive
moments are opposite to the direction of limb
movement, and are preceded by movements of the
trunk that oppose them. As an example, unilateral right
arm ﬂexion generates reactive moments of trunk ﬂexion,
lateral-ﬂexion to the right, and rotation of the thorax to
the right relative to the pelvis. This is preceded by small

Fig. 1. (A) A proposed model of trunk dynamics associated with arm
movements. Arrows represent directions of trunk movements
resulted from the reactive moments produced by single and both
arm ﬂexion (unﬁlled) and extension (ﬁlled) movements. In the
transverse plane of trunk motion, the arrows represent trunk movement relative to the pelvis. (B) Predictions of the muscle activation
pattern for trunk extensor, right rotator (R-rotator) and left lateralﬂexor (L-lateral-ﬂexor) muscles in control of the speciﬁc plane
moments associated with arm movements as predicted in A.
Simpliﬁed EMG activation pattern is represented as unﬁlled (arm
ﬂexion) and ﬁlled (arm extension) boxes. For instance, the trunk
extensor muscle has a two-burst pattern of the agonistic activity
during bilateral arm ﬂexion (ﬁrst burst, counteracting reactive
moments from acceleration of the arms in a pre-planned manner)
and has a single burst pattern of the agonistic activity during bilateral
arm extension (counteracting reactive moments from deceleration of
the arms).

164

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

amplitude trunk extension, lateral-ﬂexion to the left and
rotation of the thorax to the left relative to the pelvis as
a result of anticipatory activity of muscles including the
erector spinae (trunk extensor) and right OI (rotates
pelvis to left relative to thorax). Muscle activity occurs in
a ‘‘triphasic’’ pattern commonly observed for ballistic
movements. This includes an early burst of a muscle
that opposes the reactive moment (agonist muscle), a
burst of that muscle’s antagonist at intermediate latency
in association with the opposite reactive moment from
arm deceleration, and second later burst of the agonist
muscle to conclude the APA.
Activity of a muscle may be aligned to control of
reactive moments in a speciﬁc plane of motion and this
can be interpreted from how the activation varies
between bilateral and unilateral arm movements. For
instance, for control of sagittal plane moments, the
required muscle activation is the same for movements
of both left and right arm in the same direction (ﬂexion
or extension) but opposite for opposite directions of
movement of one arm (Fig. 1B; Sagittal). For transverse
plane control, the required muscle activation is opposite
for movements of an arm in opposite directions,
opposite for movements of the left and right arm
movements in the same direction, but similar for
movements of the left and right arm in opposite
directions (Fig. 1B; Transverse). For frontal plane
control, the required muscle activation is the same for
movement of an arm in opposite directions but its
opposite for movement of the left and right arm,
regardless of movement directions (Fig. 1B; Frontal).
These predictions were based on those proposed and
validated using a simple model of dynamics associated
with arm movements (Hodges et al., 2000) and previous
data (Aruin and Latash, 1995; Hodges and Richardson,
1997) (Fig. 1). Data are interpreted with respect to
these predicted patterns in the results section. It is
important to acknowledge that this stylized depiction of
the data is an interpretation to assist with the
understanding of the data and should not be considered
as the deﬁnitive interpretation.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Statistica 7
(Statsoft, Tulsa, OK). Peak arm acceleration was
compared between Directions (ﬂexion vs. extension)
and three diﬀerent Sides of arm movement (left/bilateral/
right) using a repeated measures two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA). Times of onset and peak EMG were
compared between Muscles (n = 7), movement
Directions (ﬂexion vs. extension), and Sides of arm
movement (left, bilateral, right) using a repeated
measures three-way ANOVA. Peak EMG amplitude was
compared between Directions (ﬂexion vs. extension),
and Sides of arm movement (left, bilateral, right) for
each muscle separately using a repeated measures
two-way ANOVA. Post-hoc testing was undertaken with
Duncan’s multiple range tests. Signiﬁcance was set at
p < 0.05. For a small number of participants, EMG data
of PM-t (n = 2), PM-v (n = 1) and QL-a (n = 1) were

aﬀected by movement artifact and excluded from
analysis.

RESULTS
Peak arm acceleration
Peak arm acceleration did not diﬀer between the
directions of arm movement or the side of arm
movement (main eﬀect: Direction: p > 0.67, Side:
p > 0.07, interaction: Direction  Side: p > 0.12). This
conﬁrms the arm was moved in a similar manner across
conditions.
EMG activity of muscles with a typical trunk extensor
(ES) and ﬂexor/rotator (OE and OI) action in
association with arm movements
The pattern of ES EMG was similar to the ‘‘two-burst’’
(agonist muscle) and ‘‘single-burst’’ (antagonist muscle)
of activity within the ‘‘triphasic’’ pattern observed in
earlier studies (Fig. 2). An early and late burst of ES
EMG was recorded during arm ﬂexion, and a single
burst with intermediate timing during arm extension.
This pattern is consistent with that predicted for a typical
trunk extensor muscle (Figs. 1 and 2). This contribution
to control of sagittal plane moments is also reﬂected in
an earlier EMG onset (epoch 1 [0–10 ms after deltoid
EMG onset] vs. epoch 5–7 [40–70 ms after deltoid
EMG onset]) and earlier time of peak ES EMG during
arm ﬂexion than extension, regardless of arm sides
(EMG onset – interaction: Muscle  Direction  Side:
p < 0.01, post hoc: p < 0.05; Fig. 3; time of peak ES
EMG – interaction: Muscle  Direction  Side: p < 0.01,
post hoc: all p < 0.05; see Fig. 4). Peak ES EMG
amplitude was greater during ipsilateral (right) and
bilateral arm ﬂexion than the other directions and that
recorded during ﬂexion of the contralateral arm
(interaction: Direction  Side: p < 0.01, post hoc: all
p < 0.05). Peak ES EMG amplitude was greater during
extension of contralateral (left) arm than that of
ipsilateral (right) arm (post hoc: p < 0.05). Peak
amplitude did not diﬀer between directions for
contralateral (left) arm movement (post hoc: p > 0.07).
The diﬀerence in amplitude between right and left arm
ﬂexion and extension (despite similar sagittal plane
moments) implies an additional role in control of
transverse/frontal plane moments.
According to the predictions from earlier work (Fig. 1),
the pattern of OI EMG was typical of a muscle with the
potential to control transverse plane moments. The
onset of right OI EMG (which rotates the thorax toward
the right relative to the pelvis [clockwise when viewed
from the top]) was earlier with contralateral (left) arm
ﬂexion (associated with a rotary reactive moment of the
thorax toward the left relative to the pelvis) than
extension (epoch 3 [30–20 ms before deltoid EMG
onset] vs. epoch 8 to 9 [70–90 ms after deltoid EMG
onset]; post hoc: all p < 0.05), and earlier during
ipsilateral (right) arm extension (associated with a
rotatory reactive moment of the thorax to the left relative
to the pelvis) than ﬂexion (epoch 2 to 1 [20–0 ms

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

165

Fig. 2. EMG amplitude of the erector spinae (ES), obliquus externus (OE) and internus (OI) abdominis muscles during epochs relative to onset of
deltoid EMG. Data represent the mean and SD for each 10 ms epoch across the group. Unﬁlled (arm ﬂexion) and ﬁlled (arm extension) boxes
represent simpliﬁed EMG activation patterns which were estimated based on qualitative observation and identiﬁcation of one or two peak EMG
amplitude/s. Onset of deltoid EMG occurred at 0 and is represented by the dotted line. B denotes baseline EMG amplitude calculated over 500 ms to
represent ongoing activity when standing at rest. Negative values denote earlier EMG activation relative to the deltoid. Mean and SD of the EMG
amplitude during ﬂexion (unﬁlled) and extension (ﬁlled) of left (L), both (B) and right (R) arm(s) are shown, normalized to the peak EMG amplitude
across epochs. As shown in Fig. 1B, predictions of the muscle activation pattern for ES (trunk extensor) and OI (right trunk rotator) with arm
movements are shown in gray boxes. It is important to note that the depicted patterns do not exactly match those in Fig. 1B which is most likely
accounted for by the combined function of the muscles in multiple planes.

before deltoid EMG onset] vs. epoch 5 to 6 [40–60 ms
after deltoid EMG onset]; post hoc: all p < 0.05; Figs. 2
and 3). The onset of OI EMG did not diﬀer between
directions during bilateral arm (epoch 2–4 [10–40 ms
after deltoid EMG onset]; post hoc: p > 0.19; Fig. 3)
consistent with a limited role of the caudal largely
horizontal ﬁbers of this muscle in control of sagittal
moments, which are opposite for arm ﬂexion and
extension. Peak OI EMG was earlier in ﬂexion with
bilateral and contralateral (left) arm than in extension
(post hoc: all p < 0.05; Fig. 4). Peak amplitude of OI
was greater during ipsilateral (right) and bilateral arm
ﬂexion
than
the
other
direction
(interaction:
Direction  Side: p < 0.01, post hoc: all p < 0.05). Peak
amplitude of OI was greater with contralateral (left) arm
toward extension than ﬂexion (post hoc: all p < 0.05).
This peak activity of OI corresponded to the single burst
of the intermediate timing within the ‘‘triphasic response’’

that counteracts the reactive moment of the thorax to
the left relative to the pelvis caused by deceleration of
the arm. Taken together, these direction- and limbspeciﬁc diﬀerences of right OI EMG are consistent with
the predicted role of this muscle in generation of a
transverse plane moment of the thorax to the right
relative to the pelvis in advance of reactive moments to
the left.
OE EMG onset did not diﬀer between directions or
sides of movement (epoch 1 to 3 [10 ms before to
30 ms after deltoid EMG onset]; Figs. 2 and 3). Time of
peak OE EMG was earlier with bilateral and
contralateral (left) arm toward extension than that
toward ﬂexion (post hoc: all p < 0.05; Fig. 4). Its peak
EMG amplitude was greater during both directions of
ipsilateral (right) arm movements than the other sides
and directions (interaction: Direction  Side: p < 0.05,
post hoc: all p < 0.05). These data imply a role in

166

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

Fig. 3. Onset of trunk muscle EMG relative to prime mover (deltoid)
during rapid arm ﬂexion (unﬁlled) and extension (ﬁlled). Onset of trunk
muscle EMG is represented by time of epoch data where one epoch
equates to 10 ms of duration. Onset of deltoid EMG is indicated by
the dotted line at zero. SD is shown. ‘‘#’’ indicates that onset of the
speciﬁc muscle EMG diﬀered between directions of all sides of arm(s)
(p < 0.05). ‘‘’’ indicates diﬀerence between directions of the speciﬁc
arm for the speciﬁc muscle (p < 0.05). L, left; B, both; R, right; PM-t,
transverse region of psoas major; PM-v, vertebral region of psoas
major; QL-a, anterior layer of quadratus lumborum; QL-p, posterior
layer of quadratus lumborum; ES, erector spinae; OE, obliquus
externus abdominis; OI, obliquus internus abdominis.

Fig. 4. Time of peak EMG amplitude relative to prime mover (deltoid)
during rapid arm ﬂexion (unﬁlled) and extension (ﬁlled). Time of peak
EMG amplitude is represented by epoch data where one epoch
equates to 10 ms of duration and zero equates onset of deltoid EMG.
SD is shown. ‘‘#’’ indicates that time of peak EMG amplitude diﬀered
between directions of all sides of arm(s) for the speciﬁc muscle
(p < 0.05). ‘‘’’ indicates diﬀerence between directions of the speciﬁc
arm for the speciﬁc muscle (p < 0.05). L, left; B, both; R, right; PM-t,
transverse region of psoas major; PM-v, vertebral region of psoas
major; QL-a, anterior layer of quadratus lumborum; QL-p, posterior
layer of quadratus lumborum; ES, erector spinae; OE, obliquus
externus abdominis; OI, obliquus internus abdominis.

frontal plane motion, as reactive moments in this plane
would be expected to be similar for ﬂexion and
extension of one arm, but opposite for movements of
the left and right arms (Fig. 1).
Activity of PM-t and PM-v during arm movements
PM-t EMG mirrored the pattern of activity of a typical trunk
extensor for the control of sagittal plane moments (Fig. 5).
The onset of PM-t EMG was earlier with rapid ﬂexion of
the arm than with extension, and this was similar for
movement of the right and left arms (post hoc: all
p < 0.05; Fig. 3). The onset of PM-t EMG occurred
shortly after the anterior deltoid EMG onset (epoch

1–3 [0–30 ms after deltoid EMG onset]; Fig. 3). Like ES,
PM-t EMG involved a two-burst pattern as per the
agonist component of a ‘‘triphasic’’ pattern (Figs. 1 and
5). The time of peak PM-t EMG diﬀered between
directions only during ipsilateral (right) arm movement:
PM-t EMG was earlier in ﬂexion than in extension (post
hoc: p < 0.05; Fig. 4). The peak amplitude of PM-t
EMG was greater during arm ﬂexion of all sides and
contralateral (left) arm extension than during arm
extension of ipsilateral (right) and bilateral sides
(interaction: Direction  Side: p < 0.01, post hoc: all
p < 0.05). The diﬀerence in EMG amplitude between
right and left arm extension would imply an additional
role in control of transverse and/or frontal plane moments.
Onset of PM-v EMG diﬀered between directions only
for bilateral arm movement: PM-v EMG onset was
earlier during arm ﬂexion than extension (epoch 4 [30–
40 ms after deltoid EMG onset] vs. epoch 7 [60–70 ms
after deltoid EMG onset], post hoc: p < 0.05; Fig. 3)
consistent with a contribution to sagittal control as an
extensor. Also, when the pattern of PM-v EMG is
compared against the predicted pattern of trunk muscle
activity, its activation pattern is consistent with that
predicted for a typical trunk extensor muscle (Fig. 5).
The time of peak PM-v EMG diﬀered between directions
only during ipsilateral (right) arm movement: peak EMG
was earlier during arm ﬂexion than extension (post hoc:
p < 0.05; see Fig. 4). During arm ﬂexion, peak EMG
amplitude was greater on the ipsilateral (right) side than
the contralateral (left) side (interaction: Direction * Side:
p < 0.01, post hoc: all p < 0.05). Its peak amplitude
was also greater during contralateral (left) arm
extension than contralateral (left) arm ﬂexion and
ipsilateral (right) arm extension (post hoc: all p < 0.05).
These observations would imply an additional role in
control of transverse plane moments as reactive
moments diﬀer between directions and sides of arm
movement and unlike frontal plane moments, transverse
moments are similar for ﬂexion of one arm and
extension of the other (Fig. 1).
The times of onset and peak EMG were also
compared between PM-t and PM-v. This analysis
showed that the onset of PM-t EMG was signiﬁcantly
earlier than that of PM-v in bilateral ﬂexion (post hoc:
p < 0.05). There was a similar tendency for the time of
peak EMG between PM-t and PM-v (post hoc:
p = 0.057).
Activity of QL-a and QL-p during arm movements
QL-a EMG activity was similar to that predicted to control
transverse and sagittal plane moments. Onset of QL-a
EMG was earlier during extension of the ipsilateral
(right) arm (reactive moment of thorax to the left relative
to the pelvis) than during ﬂexion (epoch 1 to 1
[10 ms before to 10 ms after deltoid EMG onset] vs.
epoch 5 to 6 [40–60 ms after deltoid EMG onset]; post
hoc: p < 0.05; see Fig. 3). Onset of QL-a EMG was
also earlier with contralateral (left) arm ﬂexion (reactive
moment of thorax to the left relative to the pelvis) than
extension (epoch 1 to 2 [0–20 ms after deltoid EMG
onset] vs. epoch 4–6 [30–60 ms after deltoid EMG

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

167

Fig. 5. EMG amplitude of regions of the psoas major (PM) and quadratus lumborum (QL) muscles during epochs relative to onset of deltoid EMG.
Data represent the mean and SD for each 10 ms epoch across the group. Unﬁlled (arm ﬂexion) and ﬁlled (arm extension) boxes represent simpliﬁed
EMG activation patterns which were estimated based on qualitative observation and identiﬁcation of one or two peak EMG amplitude/s. Onset of
deltoid EMG occurred at 0 and is represented by the dotted line. B denotes baseline EMG amplitude calculated over 500 ms to represent ongoing
activity when standing at rest. Negative values denote earlier EMG activation relative to the deltoid. Mean and SD of the EMG amplitude during
ﬂexion (unﬁlled) and extension (ﬁlled) of left (L), both (B) and right (R) arm(s) are shown, normalized to the peak EMG amplitude across epochs. It is
important to note that the depicted patterns do not exactly match those in Fig. 1B which is most likely accounted for by the combined function of the
muscles in multiple planes. PM-t, transverse region of psoas major; PM-v, vertebral region of psoas major; QL-a, anterior layer of quadratus
lumborum; QL-p, posterior layer of quadratus lumborum.

onset]; post hoc: p < 0.05). QL-a EMG onset was earlier
during bilateral arm extension (trunk extension moment)
than during ﬂexion (epoch 2 to 3 [10–30 ms after
deltoid EMG onset] vs. epoch 9 to 10 [80–100 ms
after deltoid EMG onset]; post hoc: p < 0.05), which
implies a contribution to sagittal control as a ﬂexor
(Fig. 5). Time of peak QL-a EMG diﬀered between
directions only during the ipsilateral (right) arm
movements: peak EMG amplitude was earlier in
extension than in ﬂexion (post hoc: p < 0.05; see
Fig. 4). Although peak QL-a EMG amplitude did not
diﬀer between directions of ipsilateral (right) arm
movement (interaction: Direction  Side: p < 0.05; post
hoc: p > 0.80), it diﬀered between directions during
contralateral (left) and bilateral arm movements: EMG
amplitude was greater in extension and ﬂexion,
respectively, compared to the other directions (post hoc:
all p < 0.05). Taken together, these data imply a role in
control of rotation of thorax to left relative to pelvis and
trunk extension: i.e. contribution to rotation of thorax to
right relative to pelvis and trunk ﬂexion. Such role is

also reﬂected in the pattern of QL-a EMG that is
consistent with that predicted for a typical trunk ﬂexor
and right rotator muscle (Fig. 5).
Unlike QL-a, onset of QL-p EMG did not diﬀer
between sides or directions (all post hoc: p > 0.14) and
EMG increased during the 4th to 7th epochs (31–70 ms
after deltoid EMG onset for all directions and sides
(Figs. 3 and 5). However, the time of peak activity was
earlier during bilateral arm extension than ﬂexion (post
hoc: p < 0.05; Fig. 4), which implies some relationship
to control in the sagittal plane, as a trunk ﬂexor. In
addition, peak QL-p EMG amplitude was higher during
the contralateral (left) arm extension and the ipsilateral
(right) arm ﬂexion than during movement in the opposite
direction (interaction: Direction  Side: p < 0.01, post
hoc: all p < 0.05). This implies a role in control of
transverse moments. In addition, its role in the trunk
sagittal and transverse plane motion is reinforced by the
pattern of QL-p EMG consistent with that predicted for
typical trunk ﬂexor and left rotator muscles, respectively
(Fig. 5).

168

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

Variability in patterns of trunk muscle activity
between individuals
Further inspection of EMG data for individual participants
shows two distinct activation patterns of regions of PM
during bilateral arm movement when moments are
primarily in the sagittal plane. During bilateral arm
ﬂexion, one group of individuals (n = 7 for both PM-t
and PM-v; S01–S08 in Fig. 6) recruited PM-t and PM-v
in the typical two-burst pattern of the ‘‘triphasic’’
response, whereas the remaining individuals (n = 4
[PM-t]; n = 5 [PM-v]; S09–S13 in Fig. 6) recruited these
muscles as a single-burst of intermediate timing for both
regions of PM. During bilateral arm extension, variability
between individuals was less apparent. In the former
group, a single-burst pattern was observed in PM-t
(S01–S08 in Fig. 7), and only one individual of the latter
group showed the two-burst pattern in PM-t activity (S11
from group of S09–S13 in Fig. 7). Activity of other
muscles did not show this distinct pattern of variation
between individuals (Fig. 7). Fig. 8 shows raw rectiﬁed

EMG from a single participant during bilateral arm
ﬂexion and extension.

DISCUSSION
The ﬁndings of this study indicate that the CNS
coordinates activity of speciﬁc regions of PM and QL
independently as a component of the APA that
precedes the predictable challenge to the spine
associated with limb movements. The spatial and
temporal features of discrete activity of diﬀerent regions
within these muscles matched their diﬀering mechanical
advantage predicted from their anatomy.
Activity of regions of PM is consistent with
predictions based on anatomical diﬀerences
Independent control of the mechanically unique fascicle
regions of PM as a component of the APA associated
with arm movement is consistent with previous
investigations where discrete control between regions

Fig. 6. Individual epoch data of EMG amplitude relative to onset of deltoid EMG during bilateral arm ﬂexion. Each epoch equates to 10 ms of
duration. Onset of deltoid EMG is indicated by the dotted line at zero. EMG amplitude of each muscle is normalized to its peak amplitude across
epochs. Note two distinct activation patterns in each region of psoas major (PM) across individual subjects, whereas no such distinct activation
patterns are evident in typical superﬁcial trunk extensor (erector spinae [ES]) and ﬂexor (obliquus externus abdominis [OE]) muscles in the same
subjects. PM-t, transverse regions of PM; PM-v, vertebral region of PM; S, subject.

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

169

Fig. 7. Individual epoch data of EMG amplitude relative to onset of deltoid EMG during bilateral arm extension. Each epoch equates to 10 ms of
duration. Onset of deltoid EMG is indicated by the dotted line at zero. EMG amplitude is normalized to its peak amplitude across epochs. Note
variability is much less apparent in regions of PM between individual subjects in comparison to the activation patterns during bilateral arm ﬂexion.
PM-t, transverse regions of PM; PM-v, vertebral region of PM; ES, erector spinae; OE, obliquus externus abdominis; S, subject.

Fig. 8. Rectiﬁed raw electromyography (EMG) of trunk muscles and anterior (ﬂexion) and posterior (extension) deltoid muscles from single trials in
a subject during rapid bilateral arm ﬂexion and extension. Dotted line represents onset of deltoid EMG. PM-t, transverse region of psoas major;
PM-v, vertebral region of psoas major; QL-a, anterior layer of quadratus lumborum; QL-p, posterior layer of quadratus lumborum; ES, erector
spinae; OE, obliquus externus abdominis; OI, obliquus internus abdominis.

170

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

was suggested from diﬀerences in muscle activation
during trunk loading (Park et al., 2012) and sitting tasks
(Park et al., 2013), but in this case in a manner that
is ﬁnely tuned and pre-planned by the CNS.
Co-contraction of PM fascicles that can generate
opposing moments at the spine (ﬂexion and extension)
in combination with the eﬀects of lateral transmission of
force may seem advantageous for the CNS to stiﬀen the
lumbar spine in preparation for a predictable challenge
to the spine. However, the preferred strategy did not
involve simple co-contraction but instead involved
coordination of PM fascicles on a basis of mechanical
advantage to meet the speciﬁc mechanical demands
associated with the diﬀerent movement directions.
Recruitment of PM fascicles was predictable based on
their discrete anatomy and unique biomechanical
properties, and the directions of trunk moments that
were predicted from the previous kinematic data and a
model of dynamics associated with arm movements
(Hodges et al., 2000). Although diﬀerential functions of
PM regions have been implicated in previous studies
(Park et al., 2012; Park et al., 2013) with tasks that
involve sagittal plane moments, the temporal features of
anticipatory activity of PM-t and PM-v in this study were
similar with respect to control in this plane, and implied
a role in trunk extension (earlier activity during arm
ﬂexion). Further inspection of data from individual
participants revealed variation of activation of each
region of PM between participants. Two patterns of
activity were identiﬁed for PM-t and PM-v during
bilateral arm ﬂexion: in eight individuals, PM-t and PM-v
were activated in a manner consistent with a role as
trunk extensors, whereas PM-t and PM-v were activated
as trunk ﬂexors in ﬁve. This diﬀerence in activation
might be explained by diﬀerences in spinal curvatures in
standing between the two groups of participants. A
previous study showed that activity of discrete regions
of PM diﬀers with subtle changes in spinal curvature in
sitting (Park et al., 2013). Unlike most other trunk
muscles, PM fascicles can change from ﬂexors to
extensors because they are located very close to the
IAR of the lumbar spine. Thus, subtle diﬀerences in
spinal curvatures can change the orientation of the
muscle fascicles relative to this IAR and in turn, the
action of fascicles of PM (Bogduk et al., 1992). Taken
together with the data from the present study, activation
of PM-t and PM-v as a trunk extensor could be
explained if the participants with that activation pattern
stood with a more lordotic (extended) lumbar angle
(giving PM a larger extensor moment), whereas
individuals with an activation pattern consistent with a
role as trunk ﬂexors could be explained by standing with
a less lordotic angle, toward a ﬂat or kyphotic posture
(where PM has a potential role as a ﬂexor). The lack of
similar variation in other muscles (ES [typical extensor]
and OE [typical ﬂexor]) adds weight to the argument
that the variation in PM results from its unique proximity
to the IAR.
When the predicted transverse and frontal plane
moments from unilateral arm movements (Fig. 1) are
taken together with the peak amplitudes of PM-t and

PM-v EMG, the data provide insights into the potential
role of these discrete fascicles. The patterns of
activation of both muscle regions were not exactly
matched to those predicted in Fig. 1. This implies a
combined role for these muscles in multiple planes. A
role of PM-t in right trunk rotation and left trunk lateralﬂexion is inferred from greater peak amplitude of PM-t
EMG during contralateral (left) arm than ipsilateral
(right) arm movement in extension (i.e. identical sagittal
plane moment, but opposite frontal and transverse
plane moments). However, the contribution of PM-v
appears limited to the transverse plane of trunk motion:
a role in right trunk rotation is inferred from greater peak
amplitude during ﬂexion of ipsilateral (right) arm and
extension of contralateral (left) arm than movements of
those limbs in the opposite directions (i.e. opposite
transverse plane moments, but similar frontal plane
moments). These diﬀerences in the roles of PM-t and
PM-v in trunk frontal plane motion can be explained by
the location of PM-t posterior to PM-v and thus greater
potential in control of the contralateral (left) trunk lateralﬂexion as PM-t fascicles cover more of the lateral
aspect of the lumbar vertebrae as compared to that of
PM-v. This feature provides PM-t a greater potential to
control ipsilateral (right) trunk rotation with contralateral
(left) trunk lateral-ﬂexion. These two directions of trunk
motion
are
consistent
with
lumbar
coupling
biomechanics where axial rotation of the lumbar spine at
the upper three levels is accompanied by contralateral
lateral-ﬂexion of the lumbar segment (Pearcy and
Tibrewal, 1984). These ﬁndings support the notion that
activity of regions within a muscle can be diﬀerentially
recruited based on their mechanical advantage, and this
can be pre-planned by the CNS as a component of the
APAs.
Activity of QL regions diﬀers in a manner that is
predicted based on anatomical diﬀerences
Diﬀerences in recruitment of QL regions as a component
of the APAs were evident from diﬀerences in temporal
feature of the EMG recordings. Onset of QL-a EMG
depended on the directions of reactive torques, but this
was less apparent for QL-p. For instance, QL-a activity
was initiated earlier during bilateral arm extension than
ﬂexion, implying its role in the sagittal plane as a trunk
ﬂexor. Further, similar to OI, QL-a EMG onset was
earlier during left arm ﬂexion and right arm extension
than the other directions and sides, which implicates a
potential role in the transverse plane as a right trunk
rotator. Such direction-speciﬁc activity was not evident
in QL-p, which had an EMG onset that was similar
between all sides and directions of arm movement. This
non-directional speciﬁc activity implies its role in
stiﬀening the lumbar spine regardless of movement
direction, which is similar to some other trunk muscles
such as TrA (Hodges and Richardson, 1997; Hodges
et al., 2000). Diﬀerences in timing of anticipatory
recruitment between QL regions may be explained by
their unique anatomical features. The fascicles of QL-a
are situated further anterior and lateral to the IAR of the

171

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

lumbar segments than the QL-p fascicles. As such, the
moment arms of QL-a are larger than that of the
fascicles of QL-p for sagittal, frontal and transverse
planes of trunk motion. This would account for a greater
bias of QL-a activity to changes in these directions than
QL-p. Thus, based on their mechanical advantage, the
CNS appears to diﬀerentially recruit QL-a and QL-p in
preparation of the predictable perturbation to the spine
induced by the reactive forces from arm movement.
This recruitment, based on mechanical advantage rather
than recruitment based on motoneuron size, is
consistent with the recruitment pattern in other muscle
systems such as the intercostal muscles during
respiration (Gandevia et al., 2006).
Activation of QL-a and QL-p with respect to the
transverse plane of trunk motion was consistent with
that predicted for muscles that act as right and left
rotators of the trunk, respectively. The more anteriorly
situated right QL-a fascicles are likely to have a greater
potential for lengthening with left (contralateral) rotation
of the thorax relative to pelvis, and thus a greater
potential to contribute in control of such trunk motion.
For QL-p fascicles, such greater lengthening is likely to
occur with right (ipsilateral) rotation of the thorax relative
to pelvis and thus there is a greater potential for QL-p
fascicles to contribute in control of such trunk motion.
Such diﬀerential activation pattern between regions of
QL reinforces discrete control of QL fascicles by the
CNS and also reﬂects their complex anatomical
features. Diﬀerent activation patterns and roles of QL
regions in the transverse plane could explain the
existing controversy between studies in regards to its
activation in trunk rotation (McGill et al., 1996;
Andersson et al., 2002). Andersson et al. (2002)
showed greater activity of QL during isometric trunk
rotation in the direction toward the side of the recorded
muscle than the other direction, whereas McGill et al.
(1996) showed no diﬀerence in EMG amplitude between
directions during isometric trunk rotation eﬀorts. The
ﬁndings of Andersson et al. (2002) concur with the
present ﬁndings for QL-a activity, whereas the ﬁndings
of McGill et al. (1996) concur with the pattern that may
be expected for QL-p activity. Although potential
activation pattern of QL-p in trunk rotation is hinted by
its peak amplitude during the postural task, the nondirectional speciﬁc QL-p activity derived from its
temporal feature of the onsets may support the ﬁndings
of McGill et al. (1996). Another explanation of such
diﬀerential ﬁndings could be diﬀerences in subject
restraints and instructions during trunk rotation tasks.
For instance, ﬁndings of the previous study (Park et al.,
2013) showed similar activity of both QL-a and QL-p
between directions during isometric trunk and hip
rotation eﬀorts. Such ﬁndings imply that subject
restraints may have diﬀered between studies in such a
way that allowed concurrent hip rotation during isometric
trunk rotation tasks in the study by McGill et al. (1996).
Activation of QL-p (earlier peak activity during bilateral
arm extension than ﬂexion) that suggests its contribution
to trunk ﬂexion (i.e. to overcome the trunk extension
reactive moment) contrasts with predictions based on

the previous data which showed that QL-p has potential
to generate trunk extension torque (Park et al., 2013).
This diﬀerence might be explained by diﬀerent postures:
the previous study investigated QL-p activity in supine
with trunk in 10° of extension (greater potential to
generate trunk extension torque than in the neutral
spine position), whereas in the present study, the
postural task was performed in an upright comfortable
standing posture. Due to close relationship of QL
fascicles to the IAR of the lumbar spine, even subtle
diﬀerences in trunk extension are likely to position QL
fascicles in such a way to contribute in either directions
of trunk sagittal motion.
Methodological considerations
These ﬁndings should be interpreted with consideration
that recordings of PM were made at a single lumbar
level. According to the modeling study (Bogduk et al.,
1992), the mechanical potential of PM fascicles diﬀers
at diﬀerent levels of the lumbar spine. Thus, the ﬁndings
of this study may not fully reﬂect the function of PM
fascicles at diﬀerent lumbar levels. Further, it is likely
that spinal curvature would diﬀer between individuals
and this may contribute to some variation in response
(Park et al., 2013).

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, the observations of this study show that the
CNS diﬀerentially activates individual regions within
complex spine muscles to control the three-dimensional
forces applied to the spine. The data point to a
sophisticated control of muscle activation that appears
based on mechanical advantage rather than motor unit
size (although recruitment within regions with unique
fascicle orientation is likely to be controlled on the basis
of size). This discrete activation implies the potential to
generate individual forces without compromise from
lateral transmission of force. Future work should study
the relationship of activation to subtle changes in
posture and potential changes in this sophisticated
control in people with LBP.
Acknowledgments—The authors thank Andrew Claus, Leanne
Hall, Ryan Staﬀord, and Wolbert Van den Hoorn for assistance
in data collection. P.H. is supported by a Senior Principal Research Fellowship from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia.

REFERENCES
Aminian K, Ruﬃeux C, Robert P (1988) Filtering by adaptive
sampling (FAS). Med Biol Eng Comput 26:658–662.
Andersson EA, Grundstrom H, Thorstensson A (2002) Diverging
intramuscular activity patterns in back and abdominal muscles
during trunk rotation. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 27:E152–E160.
Aruin AS, Latash ML (1995) Directional speciﬁcity of postural muscles
in feed-forward postural reactions during fast voluntary arm
movements. Exp Brain Res 103:323–332.
Bogduk N, Pearcy M, Hadﬁeld G (1992) Anatomy and biomechanics
of psoas major. Clin Biomech 7:109–119.

172

R. J. Park et al. / Neuroscience 261 (2014) 161–172

Bouisset S, Zattara M (1987) Biomechanical study of the
programming of anticipatory postural adjustments associated
with voluntary movement. J Biomech 20:735–742.
Cordo PJ, Nashner LM (1982) Properties of postural adjustments
associated with rapid arm movements. J Neurophysiol
47:287–302.
Gandevia SC, Hudson AL, Gorman RB, Butler JE, De Troyer A
(2006) Spatial distribution of inspiratory drive to the
parasternal intercostal muscles in humans. J Physiol 573:
263–275.
Henneman E (1957) Relation between size of neurons and their
susceptibility to discharge. Science 126:1345–1347.
Hodges PW, Richardson CA (1997) Feedforward contraction of
transversus abdominis is not inﬂuenced by the direction of arm
movement. Exp Brain Res 114:362–370.
Hodges PW, Cresswell AG, Thorstensson A (1999) Preparatory trunk
motion accompanies rapid upper limb movement. Exp Brain Res
124:69–79.
Hodges PW, Cresswell AG, Daggfeldt K, Thorstensson A (2000)
Three dimensional preparatory trunk motion precedes
asymmetrical upper limb movement. Gait Posture 11:92–101.
Huijing PA (1999) Muscle as a collagen ﬁber reinforced composite: a
review of force transmission in muscle and whole limb. J Biomech
32:329–345.
McGill S, Juker D, Kropf P (1996) Quantitative intramuscular
myoelectric activity of quadratus lumborum during a wide variety
of tasks. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 11:170–172.

Moseley GL, Hodges PW, Gandevia SC (2002) Deep and superﬁcial
ﬁbers of the lumbar multiﬁdus muscle are diﬀerentially active
during voluntary arm movements. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
27:E29–E36.
Ng JK, Kippers V, Richardson CA (1998) Muscle ﬁbre orientation of
abdominal muscles and suggested surface EMG electrode
positions. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 38:51–58.
Park RJ, Tsao H, Cresswell AG, Hodges PW (2012) Diﬀerential
activity of regions of the psoas major and quadratus lumborum
during submaximal isometric trunk eﬀorts. J Orthop Res
30:311–318.
Park RJ, Tsao H, Claus A, Cresswell AG, Hodges PW (2013)
Changes in regional activity of the psoas major and quadratus
lumborum with voluntary trunk and hip tasks and diﬀerent spinal
curvatures in sitting. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 43:74–82.
Pearcy MJ, Tibrewal SB (1984) Axial rotation and lateral bending in
the normal lumbar spine measured by three-dimensional
radiography. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 9:582–587.
Street SF (1983) Lateral transmission of tension in frog myoﬁbers: a
myoﬁbrillar network and transverse cytoskeletal connections are
possible transmitters. J Cell Physiol 114:346–364.
Urquhart DM, Hodges PW (2005) Diﬀerential activity of regions of
transversus abdominis during trunk rotation. Eur Spine J
14:393–400.
Zattara M, Bouisset S (1988) Posturo-kinetic organisation during the
early phase of voluntary upper limb movement. 1. Normal
subjects. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 51:956–965.

(Accepted 18 December 2013)
(Available online 25 December 2013)

