261

J Physiol 584.1 (2007) pp 261–270

The effect of lung volume on the co-ordinated recruitment
of scalene and sternomastoid muscles in humans
Anna L. Hudson, Simon C. Gandevia and Jane E. Butler
Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and the University of New South Wales, Sydney 2031, Australia

The human scalenes are obligatory inspiratory muscles that have a greater mechanical advantage
than sternomastoid, an accessory muscle. This study determined scalene and sternomastoid
recruitment during voluntary inspiratory tasks, and whether this activity varied with lung
volume, when feedback from the lungs and inspiratory muscles would differ. If afferent feedback
has a major role in determining the recruitment of the scalenes and sternomastoid, then at each
lung volume, activity would be altered. Intramuscular EMG from scalene and sternomastoid
muscles, and oesophageal pressure were recorded while subjects (n = 7) performed inspiratory
isovolumetric ramps to maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) and dynamic inspirations from
functional residual capacity (FRC) to total lung capacity (TLC). The static inspiratory ramps
were repeated at three lung volumes: FRC, FRC + tidal volume, and TLC. To determine the
profile of inspiratory activation, i.e. the initial and ongoing recruitment of the muscles, the
root mean square of the EMG was measured throughout the tasks. Scalene was recruited early,
and EMG increased with pressure, reaching a plateau at 80% MIP. In contrast, sternomastoid
activity began later, but then increased with pressure from 20 to 100% MIP. Similar profiles
of activation occurred at all three lung volumes (n.s.). The ratio of sternomastoid to scalene
EMG was also the same irrespective of the initial lung volume (n.s.). In dynamic inspirations,
scalene and sternomastoid activation had similar stereotypical profiles to the static tasks, but
scalene EMG was 15–40% greater (P < 0.05). Sternomastoid activation was the same in both
tasks (n.s.). These results suggest that in voluntary tasks, scalene and sternomastoid are recruited
in the order of their mechanical advantages, and that alterations in feedback related to changes
in lung volume failed to alter their activation. Thus, in humans, the mechanism responsible for
the differential activation of these two inspiratory muscles has an element that is preset.
(Received 23 May 2007; accepted after revision 7 August 2007; first published online 9 August 2007)
Corresponding author S. Gandevia: Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Barker Street, Randwick, NSW, 2031,
Australia. Email: s.gandevia@unsw.edu.au

The human inspiratory muscles in the neck include
the scalenes and sternomastoid. These muscles have
similar respiratory actions on the chest wall and cause
cranial displacement of the sternum and ribcage, but they
have different patterns of activity (Campbell, 1970). The
scalenes are ‘obligatory’ muscles of inspiration activated
in every breath (Raper et al. 1966; De Troyer & Estenne,
1984; Gandevia et al. 1996), after an average of ∼7%
inspiratory time in multiunit EMG recordings (Saboisky
et al. 2007). Sternomastoid is an ‘accessory’ muscle of
inspiration and does not contract during quiet breathing.
It is only recruited after ∼70% of inspiratory capacity when
tidal volume is increased by hypercapnia (Campbell, 1955)
or volitional hyperpnoea (Raper et al. 1966), or at ∼35%
of maximal inspiratory pressure during a static inspiratory
effort at functional residual capacity (Yokoba et al.
2003). Also, in patients with severe chronic obstructive

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

pulmonary disease, intramuscular recordings show strong
inspiratory activity in scalenes, but sternomastoid is silent
during quiet breathing (De Troyer et al. 1994).
De Troyer and colleagues have quantified the action of
most human respiratory muscles on the lung (Wilson &
De Troyer, 1992; for review see De Troyer et al. 2005).
‘Mechanical advantage’, or the change in pleural pressure
produced by a muscle per unit muscle mass and unit
muscle stress, is assessed by measuring a muscle’s fractional
length change during passive lung inflation. A muscle
with a high mechanical advantage shortens more (per
unit of lung volume) than one with a low mechanical
advantage. In humans, the mechanical advantage of the
scalenes (3.4% l−1 ) is greater than that of sternomastoid
(2.0% l−1 ; Legrand et al. 2003).
There is a matching of mechanical advantage and
inspiratory activity in the intercostal muscles in the
DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.137240

262

A. L. Hudson and others

anaesthetized dog (De Troyer et al. 1996b; Legrand et al.
1996; for review see De Troyer et al. 2005), and in humans
(De Troyer et al. 2003; Gandevia et al. 2006). This principle
of ‘neuromechanical matching’ (Butler et al. 2007) ensures
that intercostal muscles with a high mechanical advantage
are active early in inspiration and contract strongly, and
those with a low mechanical advantage are active late and
contract weakly. In the dog, this pattern of activity is
maintained even after muscle afferent feedback is removed
by thoracic dorsal rhizotomy or section of the phrenic
nerves (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; De Troyer et al. 1996a;
Legrand et al. 1996). However, the role of lung afferents in
this neuromechanical matching has not been tested.
Human inspiratory muscles in the neck also appear to
be recruited according to their mechanical advantage as
during quiet breathing there is more activity in scalene,
which has a high mechanical advantage, compared to
sternomastoid (Legrand et al. 2003). It is not known
whether their inspiratory activity is dependent on afferent
feedback of lung volume or muscle length, or whether it is
controlled by descending drive and recruitment strategies
with stereotypical patterns that are preset. In the human
medial gastrocnemius, there are changes in motor-unit
recruitment depending on muscle length and the relative
contribution of this muscle to isometric plantar flexion
torque (Kennedy & Cresswell, 2001). This is an example

J Physiol 584.1

where neural drive is adapted depending on muscle length
and task.
We have studied scalene and sternomastoid activity
during static ramps of inspiratory effort at different lung
volumes, and also during dynamic inspirations to high
lung volumes. At different lung volumes and muscle
lengths, feedback from the lungs and inspiratory muscles
will differ. If such feedback has a major role in determining
the recruitment of the scalenes and sternomastoid,
then their activity will be altered by lung volume. We
hypothesized that scalene and sternomastoid activity
would be similar despite changes in lung volumes, and
we tested it by comparing their activity across a range of
volumes.
Methods
Oesophageal pressure (P oes ) and intramuscular electromyographic activity (EMG) from the right scalene and
sternomastoid muscles were recorded (Fig. 1A). Subjects
performed inspiratory isovolumetric (‘static’) ramps to
maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), at three lung
volumes, and voluntary ‘dynamic’ inspirations from
functional residual capacity (FRC) to total lung capacity
(TLC). P oes , scalene and sternomastoid EMG were
determined at 11 time points across the tasks between

A

B

Figure 1. Experimental set up and analysis of
static inspiratory ramps
A, subjects were comfortably seated and breathed
through a mouthpiece with a solenoid-activated
shutter. Electromyographic (EMG) recordings were
made with bipolar electrodes inserted into the right
scalene and sternomastoid muscles. Oesophageal
pressure (P oes ) was recorded. B, representative
recordings during a 5 s inspiratory ramp (i.e. static task)
at functional residual capacity (FRC). From top to
bottom, panels show P oes , and r.m.s. and raw EMG
from scalene and sternomastoid. Cursors were placed
at baseline and maximal P oes and the corresponding
time points were denoted 0% and 100% of the ramp,
respectively. P oes , scalene r.m.s. EMG and
sternomastoid r.m.s. EMG were then determined at
10% time intervals ( e) to give a profile of muscle
activation across the task. Negative pressure is upwards
in the pressure trace. Vertical calibration: 500 μV.

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 584.1

Recruitment of scalene and sternomastoid muscles

0% and 100% of time (Fig. 1B). This allowed us to
determine the ‘profile’ of inspiratory activation, i.e. the
initial and on-going recruitment of populations of scalene
and sternomastoid motor units during isovolumetric
ramps and dynamic inspirations.
Experimental set-up

Data were obtained from seven subjects (aged 25–61 years,
six males) who gave informed consent to the procedures,
which conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki, and
which had been approved by the Human Research Ethics
Committee of the University of New South Wales. Subjects
were healthy with no major respiratory or neurological
disease.
Subjects were seated comfortably with restrictive
garments removed and grounded with a large flexible
strap on the right shoulder. The locations for insertion
of the electrodes were determined by palpation, and for
scalenus medius, it was ∼8 cm superior to the floor of
the supraclavicular fossa, and for sternomastoid, it was
at the longitudinal midpoint of the muscle. Selective
recordings of EMG were made simultaneously with pairs of
intramuscular fine-wire electrodes. The electrodes were
made from two insulated stainless-steel wires (75 μm
diameter) with 2–3 mm of insulation removed and were
inserted into each muscle via a 23 gauge needle. The EMG
was amplified (×1000–50000) and band-pass filtered
(53–3000 Hz).
A catheter was inserted to record P oes (Gaeltec Ltd, UK).
It was passed through the nose until the transducer was
located in the mid-lower oesophagus.
Subjects breathed through a mouth piece connected to
a pneumotachometer (Hans Ruldoph Inc., MO, USA) and
a solenoid-activated shutter (Honeywell, CT, USA). The
signal of airflow was integrated to give volume, and subjects
were given visual feedback of lung volume and P oes on a
large computer monitor throughout the experiment.
All signals were stored on computer via an analog
to digital interface for subsequent analysis (Cambridge
Electronic Design 1401, Cambridge, UK). EMG was
sampled at 5 kHz and flow, volume and P oes at 1 kHz.
Experimental protocol

MIP was determined in brief maximal voluntary
inspiratory efforts performed against a closed shutter at
the three different lung volumes: FRC, FRC + tidal volume
(V t ), and near TLC. Volume is expressed relative to the
usual end-expiratory level, and therefore this estimate of
FRC is considered 0 l. The highest lung volume (near
TLC) was ∼300 ml below TLC. This volume was selected
because subjects could not relax their inspiratory muscles
completely against the closed shutter at TLC. However, in

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

263

this study, this volume will be referred to as ‘TLC’. Baseline
and maximal P oes were calculated from the MIP efforts at
each lung volume, and subjects then tracked 5 s ramps
of P oes by gradually generating an inspiratory pressure
against the closed shutter with visual feedback of P oes .
These isovolumetric ramps or ‘static’ tasks were repeated
at three lung volumes: FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC, with
three to six repeats at each volume (e.g. Fig. 4). Subjects
also performed six ‘dynamic’ tasks, by inspiring voluntarily
from FRC to TLC with the shutter open. The duration of
inspiration was ∼4 s.
Data analysis
Static tasks. Cursors were placed manually at the start

(i.e. baseline P oes ) and the end (i.e. maximal P oes ) for each
ramp. To determine the profile of inspiratory activation
of scalene and sternomastoid throughout the static task,
P oes and the root mean square (r.m.s.; time constant,
0.05 s) of the scalene and sternomastoid EMG signals were
determined at 11 time points, i.e. at 0%, and 10% time
intervals to 100% of the ramp (Fig. 1B). At each time,
baseline P oes was subtracted from P oes to give P oes . For
comparison between subjects and between lung volumes,
P oes was normalized to the brief MIP generated by each
subject, at each lung volume (e.g. Fig. 5B). Baseline r.m.s.
EMG (near zero at complete relaxation) was subtracted
from EMG at each time point, and to allow comparison
of scalene and sternomastoid activation across different
lung volumes, EMG was normalized to the maximal EMG
across all tasks. Therefore, for each muscle, the average
maximal EMG during repeated inspiratory ramps at each
lung volume was determined, and the maximum value was
used for normalization at all time points and volumes. It
was not normalized to EMG during the brief maximal
inspiratory efforts because the wire electrodes were not
inserted until after the MIP was determined.
Chest wall recoil pressure (P w ) was measured when
subjects relaxed against the closed shutter after inspiration
to FRC + V t , or TLC (Agostoni, 1970). Assuming that
scalene and sternomastoid activity is representative of
all chest wall muscles, some subjects (n = 4) could relax
against the shutter (e.g. subject in Fig. 3C). However,
others (n = 3) had difficulty relaxing at high lung volumes,
and had on-going EMG prior to the onset of the inspiratory
ramps. In these subjects, P w was ∼35% less than those
who could relax. The difference in P w (P w ) between
these groups of subjects was 2.1 cmH2 O at FRC + V t , and
6.9 cmH2 O at TLC. This represents a potential error of up
to ∼14%, as MIP at TLC is only ∼50 cmH2 O (Agostoni,
1970). Therefore, to calculate the pressure generated by the
total respiratory system, and to obtain consistency between
all subjects, P w (above) was added to all values of P oes at
FRC + V t , and TLC in the three subjects who could not
relax.

264

A. L. Hudson and others

EMG recordings from sternomastoid could not be
analysed in one subject due to movement artefact. In
another subject, an adequate recording of scalene EMG
could not be made. Therefore, for Fig. 5A and B, P oes
(% MIP), scalene EMG and sternomastoid EMG were
averaged across six subjects at each lung volume. In Fig. 5C,
the ratio of sternomastoid to scalene EMG, data is the
average of five subjects with complete data from both
muscles.
Dynamic tasks. Due to the nature of the task, dynamic

tasks (voluntary inspiration to TLC) were analysed in a
slightly different way. Cursors were placed at the onset
of scalene or sternomastoid activity, and at peak inspired
volume (Fig. 2A). Then, for each muscle, lung volume,
P oes and EMG were determined at 11 time points,
i.e. at zero and 10% time intervals to 100% of time
(e.g. vertical dashed line in Fig. 2A). During any dynamic
breath, as P oes decreases and lung volume increases, there
is a concurrent increase in P w . Therefore, for each subject,
volume–P w graphs (P w that a subject could generate after
relaxation at FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC) were constructed
(not shown). Linear regressions determined the P w that a

J Physiol 584.1

subject could generate at the lung volume at each time
point, and P oes was adjusted by the estimated P w to
give the pressure generated by the total respiratory system.
Volume–MIP graphs (MIP that a subject could generate at
FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC; Fig. 2B) were also constructed,
and linear regressions determined the estimated MIP that
each subject could generate at each time point. Voluntary
activation of the diaphragm is high during maximal
inspiratory efforts across this range of lung volumes
(McKenzie et al. 1996). Pressure (P oes + estimated P w )
was then normalized to the estimated MIP. As in the static
tasks, scalene and sternomastoid EMG were normalized
to the maximal EMG of the three lung volumes during
the static tasks. Pressure (% estimated MIP), scalene, and
sternomastoid EMG were averaged across six subjects (see
above).
Statistics

Statistical comparison between the MIP that subjects could
generate at different lung volumes was made by analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures, and post hoc
testing using the Student–Newman–Keul procedure. In

A
(l)

B

l

Figure 2. Analysis of scalene and sternomastoid
activation during dynamic tasks
A, representative recordings during dynamic tasks,
i.e. inspiration from FRC to total lung capacity (TLC)
with the shutter open. From top to bottom, panels
show lung volume, P oes (negative pressure upwards)
and scalene and sternomastoid r.m.s. EMG. Cursors
were placed at the onset of scalene or sternomastoid
activity (arrows), and at peak inspired volume
(continuous vertical line). For analysis, these time points
were denoted 0% and 100%, respectively, and then
volume, P oes and scalene or sternomastoid EMG values
were determined at 10% time intervals. For each time
point (e.g. vertical dashed line) and corresponding
volume (‘x’), the estimated maximal inspiratory pressure
(MIP) that each subject could generate at that volume
was determined (‘y’, panel B). Estimated MIP was used
to normalize P oes (‘z’) at that time interval. B, MIP
that each subject ( e) and the group (•, mean ± S.E.M,
n = 7) could generate at each lung volume. For each
subject, MIP was greatest at FRC (0 l), decreased at
FRC + tidal volume (V t ) (∼ + 1 l; P < 0.05) and further
decreased at TLC (∼ +2.5 l; P < 0.05). The estimated
MIP (‘y’) for each lung volume (‘x’) was calculated for
each subject ( e) for analysis of the dynamic tasks
(panel A).

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

Recruitment of scalene and sternomastoid muscles

J Physiol 584.1

the static tasks, comparison between EMG at the different
lung volumes was made by two-way repeated measures
ANOVA, with lung volume (FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC)
and P oes (0–20%, 20–40%, 40–60%, 60–80% and 80–100%
MIP) as factors. Contrasts on the volume factor compared
FRC with TLC, and their mean with FRC + V t . Contrasts
on P oes factor compared each level with the next
(i.e. 0–20% MIP with 20–40% MIP, 20–40% MIP with
40–60% MIP, etc.). Scalene and sternomastoid EMG values
were averaged in 20% blocks of MIP, on the basis of P oes
(% MIP) values at the 11 time points (Fig. 1B). If a subject
had a missing value (i.e. no value of P oes in the 20% MIP
block) it was replaced with the group mean (Tabachnick
& Fidell, 1989).
To compare muscle activation during the static and
dynamic tasks, a two-way repeated measures ANOVA was
used with task (i.e. static verses dynamic) and pressure
(0–20% MIP or % estimated MIP, etc., as above) as factors.
Contrasts compared task and pressure (as above). For the
static task factor, P oes (% MIP), scalene and sternomastoid
EMG values during the ramp at FRC were used for
comparison to dynamic tasks because all subjects could
relax at this volume (see above), and therefore were equally
relaxed before the dynamic tasks and static tasks at FRC.
Only pressures from 0 to 80% MIP or % estimated MIP
(i.e. 4 levels) were compared due to the high number of
missing values in the dynamic tasks above 80% estimated
MIP. The criterion for statistical significance was taken as
P < 0.05. Data are presented as means ± s.e.m.
Results
The timing and degree of activity in scalene and
sternomastoid differed during voluntary isovolumetric

A

B

inspiratory ramps (static tasks) to maximal inspiratory
pressure (MIP) and dynamic inspirations from functional
residual capacity (FRC) to total lung capacity (TLC).
To compare activity between static tasks at different
lung volumes, and between static and dynamic tasks,
inspiratory pressure during the tasks were normalized to
MIP.
Maximal inspiratory pressure

MIP differed between the three test lung volumes
(Fig. 2B). For seven subjects, the average MIP decreased
from 113.8 ± 7.6 cmH2 O (mean ± s.e.m.) at FRC, to
92.7 ± 4.3 cmH2 O at FRC + tidal volume (V t ; P < 0.05).
It was even smaller at TLC, 56.0 ± 10.5 cmH2 O (P < 0.05).
For each subject, P oes was expressed relative to MIP at that
lung volume (Fig. 2B; open circles).
Static tasks

Inspiratory ramps at three lung volumes for an individual
subject are shown in Fig. 3. Despite differences in the
pressures produced during the ramps, the profile of scalene
and sternomastoid EMG is similar at each lung volume.
Scalene was active early in the pressure ramps, often prior
to a major change in P oes (e.g. Fig. 3A). In comparison,
sternomastoid was recruited later, and in some subjects
it was not active until ∼60% MIP in some ramps
(e.g. Fig. 4B, right panel). Recruitment of sternomastoid
was delayed equally at all lung volumes despite
sternomastoid EMG having been present during the
dynamic phase of inspiration to that target volume
(Figs 3C and 4B, right panel).

C

Figure 3. Data from a single subject during static inspiratory ramps
P oes , r.m.s., and raw EMG from scalene and sternomastoid during inspiratory ramps at different lung volumes
for a typical subject. Negative pressure is upwards in the pressure trace. A, during a static task at FRC, the
subject generated a MIP of 104 cmH2 O. Scalene was active early, at the start of the ramp, but sternomastoid
recruitment was delayed. B, at FRC + V t , the subject generated a MIP of 96 cmH2 O. The recruitment of scalene
and sternomastoid is similar to panel A. C, at a high lung volume, TLC, (see Methods), the subject could only
generate 54 cmH2 O. However, scalene and sternomastoid activity remain similar to that at FRC (panel A) and
FRC + V t (panel B).

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

265

266

A. L. Hudson and others

The ‘profile’ of inspiratory activation, i.e. the initial
and on-going recruitment of scalene and sternomastoid
from 0 to 100% MIP in repeated inspiratory ramps for
an individual subject is shown in Fig. 4. The average
activation during inspiratory ramps at FRC, FRC + V t ,
and TLC for six subjects is shown in Fig. 5. Scalene
was active early, with some recruitment at 0% MIP
and a continued increase in activity with increasing P oes
(P < 0.05), before reaching a plateau at 80–100% MIP
(P > 0.05). Some subjects could not relax properly at high
lung volumes (see Methods); therefore at 0% MIP, the
average scalene EMG was elevated at TLC. Sternomastoid
EMG did not increase until after an average 20% MIP,
but then increased progressively to 100% MIP (P < 0.05).
Therefore, while scalene and sternomastoid have different
profiles of inspiratory activation, there was no difference
for each muscle in activation at different lung volumes.
Scalene EMG from 0 to 100% MIP was similar at FRC,
FRC + V t , and TLC (P = 0.16), and sternomastoid EMG
was also similar during inspiratory ramps at the three test
lung volumes (P = 0.43).

J Physiol 584.1

To study the relationship between the profile of
inspiratory activation of the two respiratory muscles, and
whether it differed with lung volume, we plotted the ratio
of sternomastoid EMG to scalene EMG (Fig. 5C). From 0
to 100% MIP, the ratio of activation was similar during
inspiratory ramps at three lung volumes (P = 0.82).
Dynamic tasks

Figure 6 shows profiles of inspiratory activation of scalene
and sternomastoid during dynamic inspirations from
FRC to TLC. Activation was consistent between breaths
(Fig. 6A), but as in the static tasks, the profile of activation
of scalene and sternomastoid differed (Figs 2A and 6).
For the group, scalene EMG increased with pressure
(% estimated MIP) in dynamic breaths (Fig. 6B, filled
circles; P < 0.05). Sternomastoid recruitment was delayed
until ∼20% estimated MIP, but then its activity increased
from 20 to 80% estimated MIP (P < 0.05).
Figure 6B also compares scalene and sternomastoid
EMG during dynamic tasks to EMG during static

A

B

Figure 4. Scalene and sternomastoid activation during inspiratory ramps at different lung volumes in
one subject
Data from one subject during 6 static inspiratory ramps at each lung volume: FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC. P oes is
expressed as a percentage of MIP for each lung volume. Scalene and sternomastoid r.m.s. EMG is expressed as a
percentage of maximum EMG across the three lung volumes (see Methods). A, scalene activation from 0 to 100%
MIP during inspiratory ramps was consistent within and between lung volumes. B, sternomastoid activity was also
similar within and between lung volumes, but the profile of activation is different from that for scalene (panel A).
In this subject, sternomastoid was not recruited until after ∼40% MIP.

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 584.1

Recruitment of scalene and sternomastoid muscles

inspiratory ramps at FRC. In scalene, the profile of
activation was qualitatively similar to the stereotyped
activation during the static tasks (Fig. 5A), and EMG
continually increases to 80% MIP or % estimated MIP
in both tasks. However, there was more scalene activity
throughout the dynamic task compared to the static task
at FRC (P = 0.04). There was no difference in the profile
of activation of sternomastoid in the two tasks (Fig. 6B; P
= 0.68).

A

B

Figure 5. The profile of activation of scalene and
sternomastoid at different lung volumes
Mean ± S.E.M data from six subjects during 5 s
inspiratory ramps at FRC (•), FRC + V t (), and TLC
( e). P oes is expressed as a percentage of MIP for each
lung volume. Scalene and sternomastoid r.m.s. EMG are
expressed as a percentage of maximum EMG across the
three lung volumes. A, at all lung volumes, scalene EMG
increased with P oes before reaching a plateau at ∼80%
MIP, and a similar profile of activation was observed
irrespective of initial lung volume. Scalene EMG is not
0% at 0% MIP because some subjects could not relax
fully against the shutter before the ramp, especially
near TLC. There was also some recruitment of scalene
prior to an increase in P oes (% MIP). B, in contrast to
scalene (panel A), sternomastoid recruitment is delayed.
At all lung volumes, sternomastoid EMG does not
increase until after 20% MIP of the inspiratory ramps.
From 20 to 100% MIP, sternomastoid EMG increases
similarly at FRC, FRC + V t , and TLC. C, to compare the
activity of sternomastoid to that of scalene, the ratio of
sternomastoid EMG (panel B) to scalene EMG (panel A)
was plotted for each lung volume (mean ± S.E.M.). As
subjects could not relax their scalene before the
inspiratory task, data at 0% MIP are not shown. There
is no difference in sternomastoid: scalene activation
during inspiratory ramps at different lung volumes.

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

C

267

Discussion
We have shown that in voluntary tasks, the profile
of inspiratory activation of scalene and sternomastoid
does not depend on lung volume or feedback from
the lungs and inspiratory muscles, and activation is
similar during isovolumetric ramps at three lung volumes.
The ratio of sternomastoid : scalene EMG is also similar
during inspiratory ramps at different lung volumes. The
stereotypical activation of scalene and sternomastoid

268

A. L. Hudson and others

during static inspiratory tasks was also observed in
dynamic inspirations across a wide range of lung volumes.
Scalene activity was greater during the dynamic
inspirations compared to static ramps at FRC (Fig. 6B;
top panel). This may be due to the requirement of the
inspiratory muscles to overcome the inertia of the chest
wall mass. Based on the force–velocity curve, dynamic
breaths will also require more neural drive to produce
pressure at higher shortening velocities. Despite greater
activity in scalene, sternomastoid activity was similar in
both tasks (Fig. 6B; bottom panel). This suggests that any
changes in afferent feedback as a result of increased scalene
EMG in the dynamic tasks did not alter the activation of
the accessory muscle, sternomastoid.
Differences in lung volume will change feedback
from many structures including the lungs, muscles and
upper airway. If inspiratory muscle activity depends on
feedback of lung volume, inputs from any of the above
structures could be responsible. Our data show that

A

J Physiol 584.1

lung volume does not affect the profile of activation
in scalene and sternomastoid muscles during voluntary
isovolumetric ramps of inspiratory pressure, or greatly
affect the activation in dynamic inspirations. Receptors
which respond to static changes in lung volume, pressure or
muscle length will be activated differentially during static
tasks at the different lung volumes, and receptors sensitive
to dynamic changes, will be activated during inspiration to
TLC (see below). Our results suggest that such behaviour
does not alter the overall profile of neural activation of
the two muscles. Also, activation does not depend on
pressure (or force) as at each lung volume, sternomastoid
is recruited at different absolute pressures (e.g. Fig. 3). The
pressure at which sternomastoid is recruited at FRC here is
similar to that in breaths with an inspiratory resistive load
(Adams et al. 1989).
The maintained firing of some intrapulmonary slowly
adapting stretch receptors, which respond to changes
in tension in the airway wall, would differ at the lung

B

Figure 6. Activity in scalene and sternomastoid during dynamic tasks in a single subject, and comparison
with activation in static inspiratory ramps
Scalene and sternomastoid EMG are expressed as a percentage of maximum EMG during inspiratory ramps (see
Methods). For the dynamic tasks, pressure is expressed as a percentage of estimated MIP (MIPe ; Fig. 2B, e). For
the static inspiratory ramps in panel B, EMG and P oes (% MIP) are average values from the ramp at FRC (Fig. 5A).
A, scalene and sternomastoid activation during 6 dynamic breaths to TLC for a typical subject. As for static
inspiratory ramps (Fig. 4), scalene and sternomastoid activity are consistent in repeated ramps, but different between
muscles. Scalene is active early, but sternomastoid recruitment is delayed until ∼20% MIPe . B, mean ± S.E.M data
from 6 subjects during dynamic breaths (•), compared to the mean ± S.E.M data from the static tasks at FRC
( e), for 0–80 P oes (% MIP or % MIPe ). In scalene, activity is greater during the dynamic tasks compared to static
inspiratory tasks (top panel), but there is no difference in the activation of sternomastoid (bottom panel).

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 584.1

Recruitment of scalene and sternomastoid muscles

volumes tested here (e.g. Widdicombe, 1954; Davis et al.
1956; Coleridge & Coleridge, 1986; Ho et al. 2001).
Intrapulmonary rapidly adapting receptors respond to
dynamic changes in inflation (e.g. Coleridge & Coleridge,
1986; Ho et al. 2001), and they would have fired during
dynamic inspirations only. Consequently, the feedback
from rapidly adapting receptors would differ in dynamic
and static contractions.
Intramuscular receptors will also be activated
differentially at the three lung volumes. At high lung
volumes and short muscle length, the background
discharge of secondary muscle spindle endings, which
respond to static changes in muscle length, will be lower
(e.g. Matthews, 1972; Vallbo, 1974). Golgi tendon organs,
which signal muscle force (e.g. Houk & Henneman,
1967; Jami, 1992; Gandevia, 1996; Proske & Gregory,
2002) are likely to discharge less at high lung volumes
(i.e. short muscle length), as the force-generating capacity
of scalene and sternomastoid will be less for the same
degree of activation (Farkas & Rochester, 1986). It is
difficult to determine the response of primary muscle
spindles during static tasks because the balance of
drives to α and γ motoneurones of human inspiratory
muscles at different lung volumes is not known. However,
spindle afferents in limb muscles discharge during slow
muscle shortening (e.g. Burke et al. 1978; Al-Falahe et al.
1990; Edin & Vallbo, 1990), so here they will discharge
during dynamic inspirations. Their response may be
less in dynamic, shortening contractions compared to
static tasks when muscle length changes less (Burke
et al. 1978). Therefore, primary muscle spindles are
likely to respond differently in the dynamic and static
tasks. Note also that muscle spindle activity in passive
expiratory muscles may also differ at the three lung
volumes.
Slowly adapting pressure-sensitive receptors in the
upper airway may also respond differentially during
inspiratory ramps at different lung volumes because the
negative pressures developed in the airway will differ
(Hwang et al. 1984a, 1984b; Mathew, 1984). In addition,
it is likely, but not definitively established, that some skin
and joint receptors will discharge differently in the three
static and in the dynamic inspiratory tasks.
Descending projections to respiratory motoneurones
and afferent feedback may differ between voluntary and
involuntary conditions. In this study, feedback related
to lung volume (irrespective of its origin) failed to alter
the voluntary activation of scalene and sternomastoid.
This suggests that, wherever the site of integration of the
descending projections and afferent pathways, feedback
associated with changing lung volume (i.e. not just lung
afferents) does not alter the distinct profile of activation of
the muscles in this study.
Why is there stereotyped activation of scalene and
sternomastoid? Respiration requires an efficient, fail-safe

C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

269

system of neural control. Activity in the respiratory
muscles during spontaneous breathing, may be driven by
a principle of ‘neuromechanical matching’ to guarantee
this efficiency (De Troyer et al. 2005; Butler et al. 2007),
as the work done contracting two muscles is minimized if
their activity is distributed according to the magnitude of
their mechanical advantages (De Troyer et al. 2005). There
may also be activation of inspiratory muscles in the neck
according to their mechanical advantages as scalene has
a high mechanical advantage and is active early in every
breath, compared to sternomastoid, which is an accessory
inspiratory muscle with a lower mechanical advantage
(Legrand et al. 2003).
The mechanism responsible for the distribution of
inspiratory activity in the canine intercostal muscles does
not depend on feedback from the chest wall or diaphragm
(De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; De Troyer et al. 1996a;
Legrand et al. 1996). In this study, we have shown that
feedback related to lung volume (from any source
including the lungs) does not affect the profile of activation
of the human scalene and sternomastoid muscles in
voluntary tasks. This suggests that the mechanism
responsible for the activation of inspiratory muscles in
humans has an element that is preset, organized either
centrally or in the spinal cord.
References
Adams L, Datta AK & Guz A (1989). Synchronization of motor
unit firing during different respiratory and postural tasks in
human sternocleidomastoid muscle. J Physiol 413,
213–231.
Agostoni E (1970). Statics. In The Respiratory Muscles:
Mechanics and Neural Control, 2nd edn, ed. Campbell EJ,
Agostoni E & Newsom Davis J, pp. 48–79. Lloyd-Luke Ltd,
London.
a
Al-Falahe NA, Nagaoka M & Vallbo AB (1990). Response
profiles of human muscle afferents during active finger
movements. Brain 113, 325–346.
Burke D, Hagbarth KE & Lofstedt L (1978). Muscle spindle
activity in man during shortening and lengthening
contractions. J Physiol 277, 131–142.
Butler JE, De Troyer A, Gandevia SC, Gorman RB & Hudson
AL (2007). Neuromechanical matching of central respiratory
drive: a new principle of motor unit recruitment? Physiol
News 67, 22–24.
Campbell EJ (1955). The role of the scalene and sternomastoid
muscles in breathing in normal subjects; an
electromyographic study. J Anat 89, 378–386.
Campbell EJ (1970). Accessory muscles. In The Respiratory
Muscles: Mechanics and Neural Control, 2 edn, ed. Campbell
EJ, Agostoni E & Newsom Davis J, pp. 181–193. Lloyd-Luke
Ltd, London.
Coleridge HM & Coleridge JCG (1986). Reflexes evoked from
tracheobronchial tree and lungs. In Handbook of Physiology,
section 3, The Respiratory System, ed. Fishman AP, Control of
Breathing, 2, pp. 395–429. American Physiological Society,
Bethesda, MD.

270

A. L. Hudson and others

Davis HL, Fowler WS & Lambert EH (1956). Effect of volume
and rate of inflation and deflation on transpulmonary
pressure and response of pulmonary stretch receptors.
Am J Physiol 187, 558–566.
De Troyer A & Estenne M (1984). Coordination between rib
cage muscles and diaphragm during quiet breathing in
humans. J Appl Physiol 57, 899–906.
De Troyer A, Gorman RB & Gandevia SC (2003). Distribution
of inspiratory drive to the external intercostal muscles in
humans. J Physiol 546, 943–954.
De Troyer A, Kirkwood PA & Wilson TA (2005). Respiratory
action of the intercostal muscles. Physiol Rev 85, 717–756.
De Troyer A & Legrand A (1995). Inhomogenous activation of
the parasternal intercostals during breathing. J Appl Physiol
79, 55–62.
De Troyer A, Legrand A, Gayan-Ramirez G, Cappello M &
Decramer M (1996a). On the mechanism of the mediolateral
gradient of parasternal activation. J Appl Physiol 80,
1490–1494.
De Troyer A, Legrand A & Wilson TA (1996b). Rostrocaudal
gradient of mechanical advantage in the parasternal
intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495, 239–246.
De Troyer A, Peche R, Yernault JC & Estenne M (1994). Neck
muscle activity in patients with severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 150, 41–47.
a
Edin BB & Vallbo AB (1990). Dynamic response of human
muscle spindle afferents to stretch. J Neurophysiol 63,
1297–1306.
Farkas GA & Rochester DF (1986). Contractile characteristics
and operating lengths of canine neck inspiratory muscles.
J Appl Physiol 61, 220–226.
Gandevia SC (1996). Kinesthesia: roles for afferent signals and
motor commands. In Handbook of Physiology, section 12,
Exercise: Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems, eds.
Rowell LB & Sheperd JT, pp. 128–172. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Gandevia SC, Hudson AL, Gorman RB, Butler JE & De Troyer
A (2006). Spatial distribution of inspiratory drive to the
parasternal intercostal muscles in humans. J Physiol 573,
263–275.
Gandevia SC, Leeper JB, McKenzie DK & De Troyer A (1996).
Discharge frequencies of parasternal intercostal and scalene
motor units during breathing in normal and COPD subjects.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 153, 622–628.
Ho CY, Gu Q, Lin YS & Lee LY (2001). Sensitivity of vagal
afferent endings to chemical irritants in the rat lung. Respir
Physiol 127, 113–124.
Houk J & Henneman E (1967). Responses of Golgi tendon
organs to active contractions of the soleus muscle of the cat.
J Neurophysiol 30, 466–481.
Hwang JC, St John WM & Bartlett D Jr (1984a). Afferent
pathways for hypoglossal and phrenic responses to changes
in upper airway pressure. Respir Physiol 55, 341–354.
Hwang JC, St John WM & Bartlett D Jr (1984b). Receptors
responding to changes in upper airway pressure. Respir
Physiol 55, 355–366.

J Physiol 584.1

Jami L (1992). Golgi tendon organs in mammalian skeletal
muscle: functional properties and central actions. Physiol
Rev 72, 623–666.
Kennedy PM & Cresswell AG (2001). The effect of muscle
length on motor-unit recruitment during isometric plantar
flexion in humans. Exp Brain Res 137, 58–64.
Legrand A, Brancatisano A, Decramer M & De Troyer A (1996).
Rostrocaudal gradient of the electrical activation in the
parasternal intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495,
247–254.
Legrand A, Schneider E, Gevenois P-A & De Troyer A (2003).
Respiratory effects of the scalene and sternomastoid muscles
in humans. J Appl Physiol 94, 1467–1472.
Mathew OP (1984). Upper airway negative-pressure effects on
respiratory activity of upper airway muscles. J Appl Physiol
56, 500–505.
Matthews PBC (1972). Muscle Receptors. Edward Arnold Ltd,
London.
McKenzie DK, Allen GM & Gandevia SC (1996). Reduced
voluntary drive to the human diaphragm at low lung
volumes. Respir Physiol 105, 69–76.
Proske U & Gregory JE (2002). Signalling properties of muscle
spindles and tendon organs. In Sensorimotor Control of
Movement and Posture, ed. Gandevia SC, Proske U & Stuart
DG, pp. 5–12. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York.
Raper AJ, Thompson WT Jr, Shapiro W & Patterson JL Jr
(1966). Scalene and sternomastoid muscle function. J Appl
Physiol 21, 497–502.
Saboisky JP, Gorman RB, De Troyer A, Gandevia SC & Butler
JE (2007). Differential activation among five human
inspiratory motoneuron pools during tidal breathing. J Appl
Physiol 102, 772–780.
Tabachnick BG & Fidell LS (1989). Using Multivariate Statistics.
HarperCollins
Publishers, Inc., New York.
a
Vallbo AB (1974). Afferent discharge from human muscle
spindles in non-contracting muscles. Steady state impulse
frequency as a function of joint angle. Acta Physiol Scand 90,
303–318.
Widdicombe JG (1954). Respiratory reflexes excited by
inflation of the lungs. J Physiol 123, 105–115.
Wilson TA & De Troyer A (1992). Effect of respiratory muscle
tension on lung volume, J Appl Physiol 73, 2283–2288.
Yokoba M, Abe T, Katagiri M, Tomita T & Easton PA (2003).
Respiratory muscle electromyogram and mouth pressure
during isometric contraction. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 137,
51–60.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Health and
Medical Research Council. We are grateful to Dr Janette Smith
for assistance with the statistical analysis.


C 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2007 The Physiological Society

