Journal of Physiology

J Physiol (2003), 546.3, pp. 943–954
© The Physiological Society 2002

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2002.028696
www.jphysiol.org

Distribution of inspiratory drive to the external intercostal
muscles in humans
André De Troyer*, Robert B. Gorman† and Simon C. Gandevia†
†Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia and *Laboratory of Cardiorespiratory Physiology,
Brussels School of Medicine and Chest Service, Erasme University Hospital, 1070 Brussels, Belgium

The external intercostal muscles in humans show marked regional differences in respiratory effect,
and this implies that their action on the lung during breathing is primarily determined by the spatial
distribution of neural drive among them. To assess this distribution, monopolar electrodes were
implanted under ultrasound guidance in different muscle areas in six healthy individuals and
electromyographic recordings were made during resting breathing. The muscles in the dorsal
portion of the third and fifth interspace showed phasic inspiratory activity with each breath in every
subject. However, the muscle in the ventral portion of the third interspace showed inspiratory
activity in only three subjects, and the muscle in the dorsal portion of the seventh interspace was
almost invariably silent. Also, activity in the ventral portion of the third interspace, when present,
and activity in the dorsal portion of the fifth interspace were delayed relative to the onset of activity
in the dorsal portion of the third interspace. In addition, the discharge frequency of the motor units
identified in the dorsal portion of the third interspace averaged (mean ± S.E.M.) 11.9 ± 0.3 Hz and
was significantly greater than the discharge frequency of the motor units in both the ventral portion
of the third interspace (6.0 ± 0.5 Hz) and the dorsal portion of the fifth interspace (6.7 ± 0.4 Hz).
The muscle in the dorsal portion of the third interspace started firing simultaneously with the
parasternal intercostal in the same interspace, and the discharge frequency of its motor units was
even significantly greater (11.4 ± 0.3 vs. 8.9 ± 0.2 Hz). These observations indicate that the
distribution of neural inspiratory drive to the external intercostals in humans takes place along
dorsoventral and rostrocaudal gradients and mirrors the spatial distribution of inspiratory
mechanical advantage.
(Resubmitted 17 July 2002; accepted after revision 11 November 2002; first published online 6 December 2002)
Corresponding author A. De Troyer: Chest Service, Erasme University Hospital, Route de Lennik, 808, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
Email: a_detroyer@yahoo.fr

It is well established that the internal intercostal muscles of
the parasternal region (the so-called parasternal intercostals)
elevate the ribs and expand the lung when they contract
(De Troyer & Kelly, 1982; De Troyer et al. 1996, 1998);
however, the action of the external intercostals remains
uncertain, particularly in humans. The conventional view,
based on the theory proposed in the mid-1700s by
Hamberger (1749), maintains that these muscles also have
an inspiratory action on the ribs and the lung. However,
this view has not been proven, and recent measurements of
the respiratory displacements of the ribs in normal subjects,
combined with measurements of muscle orientation and
muscle mass in cadavers, have led to the conclusion that
the respiratory effect of the external intercostals (that is,
the change in airway pressure produced by the muscles
during a maximal isolated contraction against a closed
airway) shows marked topographic differences (Wilson et
al. 2001). Thus, the muscles in the dorsal portion of the
rostral segments of the ribcage have a large inspiratory
effect, in agreement with the theory of Hamberger (1749);
this inspiratory effect would be even greater than that of

the parasternal intercostals. However, this effect decreases
markedly and progressively in the ventral and the caudal
direction, such that the muscles in the ventral portion of
the caudal segments of the ribcage have an expiratory,
rather than an inspiratory, effect. The implication is that
the action of the external intercostals on the lung during
breathing would be primarily determined by the
topographic distribution of neural drive among them.
Taylor (1960) performed extensive electromyographic
(EMG) recordings from the intercostal muscles in the
ventrolateral aspect of the ribcage in many healthy
individuals, and he concluded that the external intercostals are activated only by inspiratory efforts but are
usually inactive during resting breathing. However, recent
studies have indicated that, in the dog, the topographic
distribution of neural drive among the intercostal muscles
is closely matched to the topographic distribution of
respiratory effect (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; Legrand et
al. 1996; Legrand & De Troyer, 1999). The muscle areas
with the greatest inspiratory effect thus receive the greatest

Journal of Physiology

944

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

neural drive during the inspiratory phase of the breathing
cycle, and those with a smaller inspiratory effect receive
little or no inspiratory drive. Based on this principle, one
would therefore predict that in humans: (1) the inspiratory
drive to the external intercostals in the rostral segments of
the ribcage is greater in the dorsal than the ventral portion;
(2) the inspiratory drive to the external intercostals in the
dorsal portion of the ribcage is greater in the rostral than
the caudal segments; and (3) the inspiratory drive to the
external intercostals in the dorsal portion of the rostral
segments is greater than that to the parasternal intercostals. Although Campbell & Newsom Davis (1970),
referring to experiments by Sears and Newsom Davis, has
suggested that the external intercostals in the dorsal aspect
of the rostral segments of the human ribcage do contract
during resting inspiration, there are no data in the
literature with which these predictions can be compared.
Therefore, we set out to test them.

METHODS
The studies were carried out in six healthy men of 33–51 years of
age. The subjects gave informed consent to the procedures which
conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by
the human ethics committee of the University of New South
Wales. Three subjects had previously participated in many
respiratory experiments and two of them were aware of the
hypotheses underlying the studies, but three subjects were naive
and had little or no prior experience as respiratory subjects. Before
the study, these subjects were just told that the purpose was to
obtain electrical recordings from several muscles of the ribcage
compartment of the chest wall.
Preliminary studies
Anteroposterior radiographs of the chest were obtained in two
subjects at resting end-expiration to locate precisely the dorsal
portion of the rostral interspaces relative to the scapula and to
define anatomical landmarks for subsequent insertion of needle
electrodes. With the subjects standing and maintaining their arms
along the sides of the body, the dorsal portion of the third
interspace projected about 1–2 cm cranial and 2 cm medial
relative to the medial border of the spine of the scapula. This site,
which corresponds to the muscle area just medial to the angle of
the ribs, could be located by palpation easily, and it was then
evaluated in all six subjects with a 5 MHz ultrasound linear probe
(Acuson 128 X/P, Computed Sonography System; Acuson Inc.,
Mountain View, CA, USA). While the probe was placed
perpendicular to the skin, the external intercostal muscle was
clearly visualized in each subject, so its thickness and its depth
from the skin surface could be measured with a built-in digital
calliper. Depending on the subject’s height and muscularity, the
thickness of the external intercostal ranged between 7 and 10 mm,
and the depth of its external layer relative to the skin surface was
between 22 and 30 mm. Three experimental protocols were then
followed.
Experiment 1
The six subjects were first studied to compare the magnitude of
neural inspiratory drive to the dorsal versus the ventral portion of
the external intercostal muscle in the third interspace. Each
subject was seated comfortably with all restrictive garments

J Physiol 546.3

removed. The respiratory displacements of the chest wall
were monitored by inductance plethysmography (Respitrace;
Ambulatory Monitoring, Ardsley, NY, USA). The respitrace
bands were positioned around the ribcage at the level of the
nipples and around the abdomen at the level of the umbilicus,
respectively, and the gains on the two signals were adjusted by
using the conventional isovolume manoeuvre (Chadha et al.
1982). No extraneous movements were permitted after this
calibration procedure. The subject was then grounded with a large
flexible strap on the right shoulder, and recordings of external
intercostal EMG activity were made.
Recordings were made first from the dorsal portion of the muscle
by using a Teflon-coated monopolar electrode (Medelec DMG 50;
Surrey, UK). The recordings were referenced to a surface electrode
positioned 2–3 cm away, and the EMG signal was amplified and
band-pass filtered below 53 Hz and above 3000 Hz. Since this area
had been examined by ultrasonography, we could define in each
individual subject the maximal permissible length of the needle
track and marked this on the electrode. The needle was thus
inserted perpendicular to the skin surface and advanced in small
steps through the trapezius and rhomboid muscles and then
into the external intercostal. Electromyographic activity was
continuously monitored on a loudspeaker and an oscilloscope
throughout the procedure, and once a site in the external
intercostal was encountered that contained audible and visible
single motor unit activity with an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio
(> 3:1) during quiet breathing or mild voluntary hyperpnoea, the
audio signal was removed and the subject was instructed to
breathe quietly for 3–4 min through a mouthpiece connected to a
pneumotachograph. The changes in lung volume (obtained by
integration of the airflow signal), end-tidal PCO2 (measured with a
small probe attached to the pneumotachograph), and ribcage and
abdomen cross-sectional area were checked to ensure that the
subject was actually breathing at rest. All signals were stored on
computer via a Cambridge Electronic Design 1401 interface
(Cambridge, UK) for subsequent analysis. After the run was
completed, the needle was removed such that its tip was no longer
in the external intercostal, and it was then reinserted at a slightly
different angle or to a slightly different depth. In each subject, six
to twelve sites were studied.
Recordings were then made from the ventral portion of the
muscle in the third interspace. The overall experimental
procedure was similar to that used for the dorsal portion, but the
needle was inserted 10–15 mm lateral to the midclavicular line.
Indeed, the initial chest radiographs had indicated that the
costochondral junctions of ribs 3 and 4 were medial to this line,
thus implying that a needle inserted more laterally should go
through the external intercostal. When examined by ultrasonography, the depth of the muscle relative to the skin surface
also ranged between 25 and 42 mm, but its thickness was only
2–3 mm. As for the dorsal portion of the muscle, five to twelve
sites were recorded from the ventral portion of the third external
intercostal muscle in each subject.
In five subjects, a mild transient ache was occasionally noted as the
needle penetrated the rhomboid or the external intercostal, but
this always subsided rapidly. One subject reported significant
discomfort during the needle insertion in the dorsal area, well
before it reached the external intercostal, and topical anaesthesia
of the skin and superficial muscles was achieved with 2 ml of 1 %
lignocaine (lidocaine). As a result, all EMG recordings were
obtained while the subjects had minimal discomfort or none at all.

External intercostal activity in man

945

Journal of Physiology

J Physiol 546.3

Experiment 2
Four subjects were subsequently studied, on a different day, to
assess neural inspiratory drive to the dorsal portion of the external
intercostal muscle in the third, fifth and seventh interspaces. The
experimental procedure was similar to that used in Experiment
(Expt) 1. In each subject, five to ten sites were studied in each
muscle. In two subjects, recordings were also made from the
ventral portion of the external intercostal in the fifth interspace.
Experiment 3
Four subjects were studied, on yet another day, to assess neural
drive to the dorsal portion of the external intercostal muscle in the
third interspace relative to the parasternal intercostal in the same
interspace. After the recordings from the external intercostal were
completed, the needle was inserted in the ventral part of the
interspace at an angle of about 45 deg, as previously described
(Gandevia et al. 1996). Here again, six to fourteen sites were
recorded from each muscle in every subject.
Data analysis
The magnitude of neural inspiratory drive to a given area of
external intercostal or parasternal intercostal muscle was assessed
in three ways. First, all periods of resting breathing (corresponding
to the different recording sites in the muscle) were played into a
leaky integrator (decay time constant, 50 ms), and for each period,
the presence or absence of phasic inspiratory activity in the
integrated EMG signal (i.e. with a progressive increase in the signal
during the inspiratory phase of the breathing cycle and a decrease
in the signal during the expiratory phase) was noted. On the basis
of this definition of phasic inspiratory activity, no sites were
encountered with phasic expiratory activity. Second, 10 consecutive
breaths from each period were examined to measure the time of
onset (TO) of the integrated inspiratory EMG activity relative to
the onset of inspiratory airflow. Inspiratory time (TI) during these
breaths was also measured from the airflow signal. To allow
comparison between the subjects, TO for each breath was expressed
as a percentage of TI; this fraction was assigned a positive sign
when activity started after the onset of inspiratory airflow and a
negative sign when activity preceded the onset of airflow.
The third method used to quantify neural drive was based on the
measurement of the firing rates of single motor units and has been
previously described in detail (Gandevia et al. 1996; De Troyer et
al. 1997). Thus, the periods of quiet breathing used for the first

two analyses were played into a commercial neural analysis
package (Spike 2; Cambridge Electronic Design), and trigger
levels were set manually to capture all spikes with an appropriate
signal-to-noise ratio. All spikes were subsequently recalled and
manually sorted into one, two, three or four types or ‘templates’
based on their size and detailed morphology. The interactive
software allowed: (1) updating of the mean shape of the template
for each motor unit; (2) review of the frequency plots of each
single motor unit, together with inspiratory flow and respiratory
movements; and (3) superimposition of all spikes from a
particular motor unit. Using this method, we could follow
simultaneously the discharge of up to four single motor units
during several breaths.
For each motor unit, the mean discharge frequency was measured
from the plateau in the latter third of the inspiratory phase during
several consecutive breaths. Units that discharged sporadically or
very late in the breaths with less than three stable interdischarge
intervals were noted but not included in the main analysis. Several
units, particularly in the ventral portion of the external intercostal
in the third interspace and the dorsal portion of the external
intercostal in the fifth interspace, discharged tonically with an
inspiratory modulation. Since this study was aimed at quantifying
the magnitude of neural inspiratory drive, the discharge frequency
of these units was taken as the difference between the frequency in
the latter third of the inspiratory phase and the frequency during
expiration.
For each muscle area in each subject, the values of TO /TI for a given
recording site were averaged over the 10 breaths recorded from
that site, and the mean values thus obtained were then averaged
over all sites. The firing rates of the single motor units identified in
the different recording sites of a given muscle area were also
averaged over all units, and statistical comparisons between the
different muscle areas were made in individual subjects by using
Student’s unpaired t tests. The changes in lung volume, inspiratory
flow, and the pattern of ribcage and abdominal displacement were
compared similarly. However, since three muscle areas were
studied in Expt 2, comparison between them was made by analysis
of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures and multiple
comparison testing of the mean values was performed, when
appropriate, using Student-Newman-Keuls tests. The criterion
for statistical significance was taken as P < 0.05.

946

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

RESULTS

Journal of Physiology

Dorsal vs. ventral external intercostal (Expt 1)
There were no adverse consequences of the procedures,
and Table 1 shows the indices of the pattern of breathing
during recordings from the dorsal and ventral portions of
the external intercostal muscle in the third interspace in
the six subjects. Tidal volume (VT) during the recordings
from the dorsal portion averaged (mean ± S.E.M.) 0.71 ±
0.03 l and was similar to that during the recordings from
the ventral portion (0.74 ± 0.06 l). Inspiratory duration
(TI), mean inspiratory flow rate (VT /TI), and the ribcage
contribution to VT during the recordings from the dorsal
portion were also similar to those during the recordings
from the ventral portion.
Representative records of dorsal and ventral external
intercostal EMG activity during resting breathing in two
subjects are shown in Figs 1 and 2. The dorsal portion of
the muscle showed phasic inspiratory activity in every
breath in every subject (Figs 1A and 2A). This activity
involved many motor units, appeared early after the onset
of inspiratory airflow and persisted well after the cessation
of inspiratory airflow. In two subjects, activity in several
sites even started concomitantly with or shortly (15–70 ms)

J Physiol 546.3

before the onset of inspiratory airflow. On the other hand,
the ventral portion of the muscle in three subjects was silent
throughout resting breathing and showed inspiratory
discharges only when the increase in lung volume was
voluntarily and substantially augmented (Fig. 1B). In the
other three subjects, the ventral portion did show phasic
inspiratory activity during resting breathing. Only one these
subjects, however, had inspiratory activity in each site. In the
other two, inspiratory activity was recorded from only a few
sites and, when present, it was superimposed on tonic
activity persisting throughout expiration. In addition, such
inspiratory activity started after the onset of inspiratory
airflow (Fig. 2B). As shown in Fig. 3, therefore, TO /TI was
significantly (P < 0.002 or less) greater for the ventral than
the dorsal portion in every subject. Whereas this fraction
for the ventral portion in the six subjects averaged
84.1 ± 3.8 %, for the dorsal portion it was only 4.4 ± 0.8 %.
In each subject, 12–22 single motor units were identified in
the dorsal portion of the external intercostal in the third
interspace. These 109 units showed a rhythmic behaviour
as shown in Fig. 4, with a phasic inspiratory increase in the
instantaneous discharge frequency; only two of these units
(1.8 %) discharged tonically throughout expiration. Nine

Figure 1. Examples of EMG activity recorded from the dorsal and ventral portions of the
external intercostal muscle in the third interspace
A, from top to bottom: traces of airflow, changes in ribcage cross-sectional area (increase upwards), and raw
and integrated EMG activity recorded from the dorsal portion of the external intercostal muscle in the third
interspace in a representative subject. B, traces obtained during recording from the ventral portion of the
muscle in the same subject. The dorsal portion of the muscle (A) shows multi-unit activity in phase with
inspiration and only slightly delayed relative to the onset of inspiratory airflow (vertical dashed line), but the
ventral portion of the muscle (B) is electrically silent during resting breathing and fires only at the end of a
large, voluntary inspiration (third breath in B, vertical dashed line). In this and subsequent figures the
numbers in parentheses indicate the interspace concerned.

External intercostal activity in man

947

Journal of Physiology

J Physiol 546.3

Figure 2. Records from the dorsal and ventral portions of the external intercostal muscle in
the third interspace in a subject with inspiratory activity in the ventral portion during quiet
breathing
Same conventions as in Fig. 1. The two portions of the muscle in this subject are active during resting
inspiration. However, whereas inspiratory activity in the dorsal portion (A) starts shortly after the onset of
inspiratory airflow, inspiratory activity in the ventral portion (B) starts later. In addition, such inspiratory
activity is superimposed on tonic activity persisting throughout expiration. Note also that this recording (B)
contains far-field contamination during the expiratory pause; this expiratory activity arises from different
single motor units, presumably in the internal intercostal muscle, and is associated with a decrease in the endexpiratory position of the ribcage.

to 13 motor units were also recorded from the ventral
portion of the muscle in the three subjects who had phasic
inspiratory activity there (subjects 2, 4 and 5 in Fig. 3). All
these units also showed an increase in discharge frequency
during inspiration, but 14 of them (44 %) continued to
discharge throughout expiration with a firing rate of
6.6 ± 0.3 Hz (range, 4.2– 8.5 Hz).
In the three subjects with phasic inspiratory activity in
both the dorsal and ventral portions of the muscle, a total
of 58 motor units in the dorsal portion and 32 motor
units in the ventral portion were thus studied, and the
histograms of their discharge rates at end-inspiration
(i.e. excluding tonic expiratory firing; see Methods) are
shown in Fig. 5. The discharge frequency of the units in the
dorsal portion was significantly greater (P < 0.001) than
that of the units in the ventral portion in every subject. For
the three subjects, units in the ventral portion thus had
a mean discharge frequency of 6.0 ± 0.5 Hz, whereas
units in the dorsal portion had a discharge frequency of
11.9 ± 0.3 Hz. The discharge frequency of the 51 units
recorded in the dorsal portion of the three subjects without

Figure 3. Onset time of inspiratory activity in the dorsal
and ventral portions of the external intercostal muscle in
the third interspace
Data are mean ± S.E.M. values of onset time obtained in six subjects
during quiet breathing. For each portion of the muscle in each
subject, onset time (TO) is expressed as a percentage of inspiratory
time (TI). When breathing quietly, subjects 1, 3 and 6 never had any
inspiratory activity in the ventral portion.

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

J Physiol 546.3

Journal of Physiology

948

Figure 4. Measurement of the firing rates of single motor units
A shows a representative record of inspiratory EMG activity obtained in the dorsal portion of the external
intercostal muscle in the third interspace for two consecutive breaths. Two single motor units (denoted
Units 1 and 2) were clearly identified in this record, and the instantaneous discharge frequencies of these two
units are shown in B. All the action potentials from the two units are superimposed in C. Note that all the
spikes in C are identical, thus indicating that they originate in a single motor unit. Note also in B that the
discharge frequency of both units increases rapidly in the first part of inspiration and plateaus in the last twothirds of inspiration; the discharge frequency of Unit 1 then declines gradually in the first part of expiration,
whereas the discharge frequency of Unit 2 stops rather abruptly after the end of inspiration.

Figure 5. Firing frequencies of motor units in
the dorsal and ventral portions of the
external intercostal muscle in the third
interspace
Histograms of the inspiratory modulation of the
discharge frequencies of all motor units identified in
the dorsal (top) and ventral (bottom) portions of
the muscle in the three subjects who had phasic
inspiratory activity in both portions during quiet
breathing (subjects 2, 4 and 5 in Fig. 3). Bin width,
1.0 Hz. Mean values are indicated on each
histogram. For units which fired tonically
throughout expiration, the firing frequency is taken
as the difference in discharge rate between
inspiration and expiration (see Methods).

J Physiol 546.3

External intercostal activity in man

Journal of Physiology

ventral activity (subjects 1, 3 and 6 in Fig. 3) was slightly
smaller but still amounted to 10.1 ± 0.2 Hz.

Dorsal external intercostal in spaces 3, 5 and 7
(Expt2)
The indices of the pattern of breathing during periods in
which the recordings from the dorsal portion of the
external intercostal muscle in the third, fifth and seventh
interspaces were made in the four subjects are summarized
in Table 1, and representative EMG recordings from the
three muscles in one subject are shown in Fig. 6. There was
no difference between the three conditions (three muscles)
with respect to VT, TI, VT/TI, or the ribcage contribution to
VT. However, whereas all subjects had phasic inspiratory
activity in the third and fifth interspaces in every breath
(Fig. 6A and B), only one subject (subject no. 3 in Fig. 3)
had regular phasic inspiratory activity in the seventh
interspace. In two subjects, this muscle was silent in all but
a few breaths (Fig. 6C), and, in one subject, it commonly
showed continuous tonic activity without any respiratory
modulation; in each subject, however, inspiratory
discharges were recorded in each site during large,

949

voluntary inspirations (Fig. 6C). The ventral portion of the
external intercostal muscle in the fifth interspace was also
silent during quiet breathing in the two subjects studied.
Although the dorsal portion of the external intercostal in
the third and the fifth interspaces was invariably active
during resting inspiration, the two muscles had different
TO values. This difference is also illustrated in Fig. 6, and
Fig. 7 shows the values of TO /TI measured for the three
interspaces in the individual subjects. TO/TI was smaller
(P < 0.05 or less) in the third interspace than in the fifth in
three of four subjects. Also, TO/TI was smaller (P < 0.001)
in the fifth interspace than in the seventh in every subject,
including subject no. 3. For the four subjects, TO/TI thus
averaged 8.7 ± 1.7 % in the third interspace, 35.7 ± 3.6 %
in the fifth interspace and 91.3 ± 2.7 % in the seventh
interspace.
A total of 61 single motor units (12–18 units per subject)
were identified in the external intercostal of the third
interspace in this experiment, and 63 motor units (11–18
units per subject) were sampled from the muscle in the
fifth interspace. All units increased their firing rates in

Figure 6. Examples of EMG activity recorded from the dorsal portion of the external
intercostal muscle in the third, fifth and seventh interspaces
Same conventions as in Fig. 1, except that only raw EMG activity is shown. Traces obtained in a
representative subject (subject no. 1 in Fig. 3). As in Figs 1 and 2, the muscle in the third interspace (A) shows
multi-unit activity in phase with inspiration. The muscle in the fifth interspace (B) also shows phasic
inspiratory activity, but this activity starts later than that in the third interspace relative to the onset of
inspiratory airflow. The muscle in the seventh interspace (C) is electrically silent during quiet breathing (first
three breaths) and fires only at the end of a large, voluntary inspiration (last breath; vertical dashed line).

950

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

J Physiol 546.3

third interspace (5 %) continued to discharge throughout
expiration, 27 units in the fifth interspace (43 %) did so
with a tonic firing rate of 6.6 ± 0.4 Hz (range, 2.7–9.7 Hz).

Journal of Physiology

Dorsal external intercostal vs. parasternal
intercostal (Expt 3)

Figure 7. Onset time of inspiratory activity in the dorsal
portion of the external intercostal muscle in the third,
fifth and seventh interspaces
Data are mean ± S.E.M. values of onset time obtained in four
subjects during quiet breathing. Onset time (TO) for each muscle is
expressed as a percentage of inspiratory time (TI).

phase with inspiration, and histograms of these inspiratory
firing frequencies are shown in Fig. 8. The discharge
frequency of the units in the third interspace was greater
(P < 0.001) than the discharge frequency of the units in the
fifth interspace in every subject, such that for the four
subjects, the discharge frequency of motor units in the
third and fifth interspaces averaged 11.3 ± 0.4 and
6.7 ± 0.4 Hz, respectively. Whereas only three units in the

The four subjects had a similar pattern of breathing when
recordings were made from the dorsal portion of the
external intercostal in the third interspace and from the
parasternal intercostal (Table 1), and they invariably
showed phasic inspiratory EMG activity in both muscles.
Activity in either muscle involved many motor units and
started early after the onset of inspiratory airflow. The
TO/TI ratio for the external intercostal and parasternal
intercostal muscles in the four subjects thus averaged
7.1 ± 1.7 and 12.5 ± 1.9 %, respectively.
A total of 79 motor units (12–26 units per subject) were
identified in the external intercostal in this experiment,
and 86 motor units (16–24 units per subject) were
identified in the parasternal intercostal. All units in both
muscles increased their discharge rates during inspiration.
However, although the two pools of units had similar
discharge frequencies in one subject (external intercostal,
10.7 ± 0.6 Hz; parasternal intercostal, 10.6 ± 0.4 Hz; n.s.),
three subjects had greater discharge frequencies in the
external intercostal (P < 0.005 or less). As shown in Fig. 9,
the firing frequency of the external intercostal motor units
in the four subjects thus averaged 11.4 ± 0.3 Hz, but the

Figure 8. Firing frequencies of motor units in
the dorsal portion of the external intercostal
muscle in the third and fifth interspaces
Histograms of the inspiratory modulation of the
discharge frequencies of all motor units identified in
the dorsal portion of the external intercostal muscle
in the third (top) and fifth (bottom) interspaces in
four subjects breathing at rest. Bin width, 1.0 Hz.
Mean values are indicated on each histogram.

J Physiol 546.3

External intercostal activity in man

Journal of Physiology

firing frequency of all the parasternal intercostal motor
units was only 8.9 ± 0.2 Hz.

DISCUSSION
The amplitude of neural drive to respiratory muscles in
humans is difficult to quantify. Previous attempts to
evaluate this amplitude involved measuring EMG activity
during breathing with surface electrodes and expressing it
relative to ‘maximal’ values obtained during inhalation to
total lung capacity (TLC) (e.g. Grassino et al. 1978;
Goldman et al. 1978; Juan et al. 1984; Sinderby et al. 1998).
We could have used a similar method with intramuscular
electrodes to compare neural drive in the different areas of
the external intercostal muscle. However, this method
would have three major drawbacks. First, it would assume
that the different muscle areas are recruited similarly
during inspiration to TLC, and studies of the distribution
of neural drive among the parasternal and external
intercostal muscles in dogs have suggested that this
assumption may not be justified. Specifically, although
activity in the different inspiratory muscle areas increased
when neural drive was augmented by CO2 or by increased
inspiratory mechanical loads, the topographic differences
in activity that were present during resting breathing
persisted with all changes in lung volume and with all loads
(De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; Legrand et al. 1996; Legrand
& De Troyer, 1999). It is unlikely, therefore, that the
different areas of external intercostal would be driven

Figure 9. Firing frequencies of motor units in
the dorsal portion of the external intercostal
and parasternal intercostal muscles in the
third interspace
Histograms of the inspiratory modulation of the
discharge frequencies of all motor units identified in
the dorsal portion of the external intercostal muscle in
the third interspace (top) and the parasternal
intercostal muscle in the same interspace (bottom) in
four subjects breathing at rest. Bin width, 1.0 Hz.
Mean values are indicated on each histogram.

951

equally during an inspiration to TLC. Second, Kim et al.
(1985) have shown in isolated strips from the canine
diaphragm that changes in muscle length introduce
substantial alterations in EMG activity independent of
neural drive. A similar effect of muscle length has been
demonstrated during supramaximal stimulation of the
phrenic nerves with single twitches in normal humans
(Gandevia & McKenzie, 1986): the maximal compound
muscle action potentials increased 2- to 10-fold when lung
volume was increased from residual volume to TLC (i.e.
when diaphragmatic muscle length was reduced by
~40 %). Since the different areas of external intercostal
muscle in humans shorten by different amounts during
inspiration to TLC (Wilson et al. 2001), it would therefore
be expected that they would show different artifactual
changes in EMG activity during the manoeuvre. Finally,
with such large respiratory excursions, it would be difficult
to eliminate cross-contamination from neighbouring
muscles. Thus, activity from the rhomboid and latissimus
dorsi muscles might contaminate recordings from the
dorsal areas of the external intercostal, and activity from
the pectoralis and serratus anterior muscles might
contaminate recordings from the ventral areas.
To avoid these drawbacks, we therefore sampled from
many sites within individual muscle areas during resting
breathing and measured, for each site, the frequency with
which inspiratory activity was recorded and the time of
onset of activity relative to inspiratory airflow. Indeed, in

Journal of Physiology

952

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

J Physiol 546.3

the dog, the areas of parasternal and external intercostal
muscle that receive the greatest inspiratory drive also have
the propensity to fire earlier at the onset of inspiration (De
Troyer & Legrand, 1995; Legrand et al. 1996; Legrand & De
Troyer, 1999). Furthermore, when the neural drive to
the canine external intercostals is increased by ribcage
vibration, their motor units begin firing earlier (Leduc et
al. 2000). In addition, single motoneurones are known to
fire at higher frequencies with increasing neural drive
(e.g. Binder et al. 1996), and studies in patients with severe
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Gandevia et al.
1996; De Troyer et al. 1997) and in healthy individuals
(Gandevia et al. 1999) have shown that the discharge
frequencies of motor units in all inspiratory muscles
increase in response to increases in respiratory drive.
Given that the fibre-type compositions of the parasternal
intercostal muscles and the entire external intercostals in
humans are similar (Mizuno & Secher, 1989) and their
force–frequency characteristics are likely to be similar
(Farkas et al. 1985), it is therefore reasonable to assume
that the different pools of external and parasternal intercostal motoneurones have similar properties and, hence,
that a muscle area with a greater neural drive might also
show higher motor unit firing rates. Thus, by measuring
the frequency of inspiratory activity during resting
breathing, the onset time of this activity, and the peak
discharge frequency of large numbers of clearly identified
single motor units, we assessed for each muscle area three
distinct indices of neural drive that were not affected by
activation of adjacent muscles, were free of recording
artefact due to changes in muscle length, and did not need
to be normalized to the level of drive observed under
another respiratory manoeuvre.

in both the dorsal and the ventral portion of the muscle in
the third interspace showed a definite time lag, ranging
from 1.2 s (subject 5 in Fig. 3) to 2.6 s (subject 2), between
the onset of activity in the dorsal and the ventral portion.
The firing rates of motor units in these two muscle areas
were also strikingly different (Fig. 5). For these three
subjects, the discharge frequencies of motor units in the
dorsal portion averaged 11.9 Hz. The corresponding value
for the three subjects who had inspiratory activity only in
the dorsal portion was 10.1 Hz, and these values are very
close to those previously measured in the diaphragm. Iscoe
et al. (1976) have reported that, during resting inspiration,
phrenic motor axons in the cat have a mean discharge
frequency of 11.4 ± 3.8 Hz, and in two separate studies in
normal humans, we have found that, during resting
breathing, diaphragmatic motor units discharge with a
mean frequency of 10.5 ± 2.4 and 11.0 ± 2.7 Hz (De
Troyer et al. 1997; Gandevia et al. 1999). On the other
hand, the inspiratory modulation of the motor units
recorded from the ventral portion of the external intercostal in our subjects was only 6.0 Hz. Yet, the periods
during which the recordings from the dorsal and ventral
portion were made were characterized by a similar tidal
volume and a similar inspiratory flow rate (Table 1). The
ribcage contribution to tidal volume was also similar, thus
indicating that these differences in timing and discharge
frequency cannot be attributed to differences in the pattern
of breathing. Although the three indices of neural drive used
in this study are based on different measurements, they thus
lead to the same conclusion that, in normal humans
studied in the laboratory, the neural inspiratory drive to
the external intercostals is distributed along a dorsoventral gradient.

These measurements required that the subjects breathe
through a mouthpiece, wear a noseclip, and have a needle
electrode in the chest. Consequently, even though the data
were obtained with little or no discomfort, the subjects
were aware of their breathing and one cannot exclude
the possibility that the natural (automatic) pattern of
muscle activation was affected by central mechanisms.
Nonetheless, the observations obtained in the different
subjects and in the different experimental sessions in any
given subject were consistent.

As for the third interspace, the external intercostal muscle
in the dorsal portion of the fifth interspace always showed
phasic inspiratory activity. However, the onset of activity
in this area was commonly delayed relative to the onset of
activity in the dorsal portion of the third interspace
(Fig. 7). Also, the inspiratory discharge frequency of motor
units in the fifth interspace was substantially lower than
that of motor units in the third interspace (Fig. 8). The
mean discharge frequency of motor units in the dorsal
portion of the fifth interspace (6.7 Hz) was, in fact, only
slightly greater than the mean discharge frequency of
motor units in the ventral portion of the third interspace.
In addition, the external intercostal muscle in the dorsal
portion of the seventh interspace was almost invariably
silent during resting breathing (Fig. 6). Thus, neural drive
to the external intercostals in our subjects was also
distributed along a rostro-caudal gradient, and this
gradient, combined with the dorso-ventral gradient,
suggests that, as in the dog (De Troyer et al. 1999; Legrand
& De Troyer, 1999), the topographic distribution of neural
inspiratory drive to these muscles in humans is matched to
the topographic distribution of inspiratory effect.

The external intercostal muscle in the dorsal portion of the
third interspace showed phasic inspiratory activity with
every breath in every subject (Figs 1, 2 and 6), whereas the
ventral portion of the muscle in the same interspace
showed no activity at all during resting breathing in three
of six subjects and occasional inspiratory activity in two
subjects. Similarly, the two subjects in whom recordings
were made from the dorsal and ventral portions of the fifth
interspace had invariable phasic inspiratory activity in the
dorsal portion and no activity in the ventral portion.
Moreover, the three subjects who had inspiratory activity

Journal of Physiology

J Physiol 546.3

External intercostal activity in man

The relationship between the magnitude of inspiratory
effect and the magnitude of neural inspiratory drive for the
four areas of external intercostal muscle investigated in
this study is more specifically examined in Fig. 10A (filled
circles). The values for inspiratory effect in this figure were
derived from the previous studies of Wilson et al. (2001),
and the values for neural drive were obtained by
multiplying the mean motor unit firing rate (data shown
in Figs 5 and 8) by the time during quiet inspiration over
which the motor units discharged. Although the two sets
of data were collected from different subjects, there was
a close linear relationship (coefficient of correlation,
r = 0.994) between them, and this strengthens the view that
a powerful link exists between the inspiratory effect of a
particular area of external intercostal muscle and the
degree to which it is driven during inspiration. It should be
appreciated, however, that the two sets of data were also
obtained with the subjects in different body positions, so
the slope of this relationship is only indicative. Specifically,
the current electromyographic studies were performed
with the subjects seated, whereas the values for inspiratory
effect were obtained with the subjects in the supine
position. To the extent that the respiratory effect of a given
intercostal muscle area depends on ribcage compliance
and that ribcage compliance in humans increases during a
change from the supine to the seated position (Estenne et
al. 1985), it is likely that the different areas of external
intercostal muscle, particularly in the third and fifth interspaces, have greater inspiratory effects in this position. If
the values for inspiratory effect in the seated position could
be determined, the actual relationship could therefore be

Figure 10. Relationship between inspiratory effect and
neural drive for the external intercostal muscles in
humans
The filled circles in A correspond to the four areas of external
intercostal muscle investigated in this study (dorsal portion of the
third, fifth and seventh interspaces, and ventral portion of the
third interspace), while the open circle corresponds to the
parasternal intercostal in the third interspace. The values of
inspiratory effect (DPao) were derived from De Troyer et al. (1998)
and Wilson et al. (2001), and the values of neural drive during
quiet inspiration were obtained by multiplying the mean firing
rate of the individual motor units by the fraction of inspiration
during which the motor units were firing and by the mean
duration of inspiration (2.1 s); neural drive is therefore expressed
as the mean number of motor unit spikes during inspiration.
There is a close linear relationship (r = 0.994) between the data
for the external intercostal muscles, but the data for the
parasternal intercostal lie well above this relationship. However,
when the values of neural drive are plotted against the values of
mechanical advantage (B), a linear relationship (r = 0.931) fits all
data well.

953

less steep. Conversely, increases in inspiratory mechanical
load would increase neural inspiratory drive to the
external intercostals, such that the relationship might be
steeper.
The data obtained for the parasternal intercostal in the
third experiment of the study, however, lay well above the
relationship for the external intercostals (open circle in
Fig. 10A). Indeed, the mean firing rate of motor units in
the parasternal intercostal in the third interspace was
lower than the mean firing rate of motor units in the dorsal
portion of the external intercostal in the same interspace
(Fig. 9), but the two muscles were found to fire almost
simultaneously at the onset of inspiration. As a result, the
neural drive to the parasternal intercostal was greater than
anticipated on the basis of its inspiratory effect. The reason
for this difference is uncertain, but Wilson & De Troyer
(1992, 1993) have shown that the respiratory effect of a given
muscle is determined by the product of two variables,
namely the mass of the muscle and its mechanical advantage
(that is, the respiratory effect per unit muscle mass and
unit maximum active stress). As in the dog (De Troyer et
al. 1999), the distribution of muscle mass for the external
intercostals in humans mirrors the distribution of
mechanical advantage, such that the muscle areas with a
greater inspiratory mechanical advantage also have a greater
mass (Wilson et al. 2001). In contrast, the inspiratory
mechanical advantage of the parasternal intercostal in the
third interspace is about two-thirds of the mechanical
advantage of the external intercostal in the dorsal portion
of the same interspace (De Troyer et al. 1998; Wilson et al.

Journal of Physiology

954

A. De Troyer, R. B. Gorman and S. C. Gandevia

2001), but its mass is much lower. In other words, the
difference in inspiratory effect between these two muscles
is primarily related to the difference in mass, and indeed,
when neural drive is plotted against mechanical advantage
(Fig. 10B), the parasternal and external intercostals appear
to yield a unique relationship (r = 0.931). Consequently,
the idea could be offered that the distribution of neural
drive among the different intercostal muscles is closely
matched to the distribution of mechanical advantage,
rather than the distribution of respiratory effect, but the
question then would arise as to why the parasternal
intercostal muscles in humans are not thicker. No answer
to this teleological question can be provided at this stage.

REFERENCES
Binder MD, Heckman CK & Powers RK (1996). The physiological
control of motoneuron activity. In Handbook of Physiology, section
12, Exercise, Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems,
pp. 3–53. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Campbell EJM & Newsom Davis J (1970). The intercostal muscles
and other muscles of the rib cage. In The Respiratory Muscles.
Mechanics and Neural Control, 2nd edn, ed. Campbell EJM,
Agostoni E & Newsom Davis J, pp. 161–174. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Chadha TS, Watson H, Birch S, Jenouri GA, Schneider AW, Cohn
MA & Sackner MA (1982). Validation of respiratory inductance
plethysmography using different calibration procedures. Am Rev
Respir Dis 125, 644–649.
De Troyer A & Kelly S (1982). Chest wall mechanics in dogs with
acute diaphragm paralysis. J Appl Physiol 53, 373–379.
De Troyer A, Leeper JB, McKenzie DK & Gandevia SC (1997).
Neural drive to the diaphragm in patients with severe COPD. Am J
Resp Crit Care Med 155, 1335–1340.
De Troyer A & Legrand A (1995). Inhomogeneous activation of the
parasternal intercostals during breathing. J Appl Physiol 79, 55–62.
De Troyer A, Legrand A, Gevenois PA & Wilson TA (1998).
Mechanical advantage of the human parasternal intercostal and
triangularis sterni muscles. J Physiol 513, 915–925.
De Troyer A, Legrand A & Wilson TA (1996). Rostrocaudal gradient
of mechanical advantage in the parasternal intercostal muscles of
the dog. J Physiol 495, 239–246.
De Troyer A, Legrand A & Wilson TA (1999). Respiratory
mechanical advantage of the canine external and internal
intercostal muscles. J Physiol 518, 283–289.
Estenne M, Yernault JC & De Troyer A (1985). Rib cage and
diaphragm-abdomen compliance in humans: effects of age and
posture. J Appl Physiol 59, 1842–1848.
Farkas GA, Decramer M, Rochester DF & De Troyer A (1985).
Contractile properties of intercostal muscles and their functional
significance. J Appl Physiol 59, 528–535.

J Physiol 546.3

Gandevia SC, Gorman RB, McKenzie DK & De Troyer A (1999).
Effects of increased ventilatory drive on motor unit firing rates in
human inspiratory muscles. Am J Resp Crit Care Med 160,
1598–1603.
Gandevia SC, Leeper JB, McKenzie DK & De Troyer A (1996).
Discharge frequencies of parasternal intercostal and scalene motor
units during breathing in normal and COPD subjects. Am J Resp
Crit Care Med 153, 622–628.
Gandevia SC & McKenzie DK (1986). Human diaphragmatic EMG:
changes with lung volume and posture during supramaximal
phrenic stimulation. J Appl Physiol 60, 1420–1428.
Goldman MD, Grassino A, Mead J & Sears TA (1978). Mechanics of
the human diaphragm during voluntary contraction: dynamics.
J Appl Physiol 44, 840–848.
Grassino A, Goldman MD, Mead J & Sears TA (1978). Mechanics of
the human diaphragm during voluntary contraction: statics. J Appl
Physiol 44, 829–839.
Hamberger GE (1749). De Respirationis Mechanismo et usu Genuino,
Iena.
Iscoe S, Dankoff J, Migicovsky R & Polosa C (1976). Recruitment
and discharge frequency of phrenic motoneurones during
inspiration. Respir Physiol 26, 113–128.
Juan G, Calverley P, Talamo C, Schnader J & Roussos C (1984).
Effect of carbon dioxide on diaphragmatic function in human
beings. N Engl J Med 310, 874–879.
Kim MJ, Druz WS & Sharp JT (1985). Effect of muscle length on
electromyogram in a canine diaphragm strip preparation. J Appl
Physiol 58, 1602–1607.
Leduc D, Brunko E & De Troyer A (2000). Response of the canine
inspiratory intercostal muscles to chest wall vibration. Am J Resp
Crit Care Med 161, 510–516.
Legrand A, Brancatisano A, Decramer M & De Troyer A (1996).
Rostrocaudal gradient of electrical activation in the parasternal
intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495, 247–254.
Legrand A & De Troyer A (1999). Spatial distribution of external and
internal intercostal activity in dogs. J Physiol 518, 291–300.
Mizuno M & Secher NH (1989). Histochemical characteristics of
human expiratory and inspiratory intercostal muscles. J Appl
Physiol 67, 592–598.
Sinderby C, Beck J, Spahija J, Weinberg J & Grassino A (1998).
Voluntary activation of the human diaphragm in health and
disease. J Appl Physiol 85, 2146–2158.
Taylor A (1960). The contribution of the intercostal muscles to the
effort of respiration in man. J Physiol 151, 390–402.
Wilson TA, Legrand A, Gevenois PA & De Troyer A (2001).
Respiratory effects of the external and internal intercostal muscles
in humans. J Physiol 530, 319–330.
Wilson TA & De Troyer A (1992). Effect of respiratory muscle
tension on lung volume. J Appl Physiol 73, 2283–2288.
Wilson TA & De Troyer A (1993). Respiratory effect of the
intercostal muscles in the dog. J Appl Physiol 75, 2636–2645.

