263

J Physiol 573.1 (2006) pp 263–275

Spatial distribution of inspiratory drive to the parasternal
intercostal muscles in humans
Simon C. Gandevia1 , Anna L. Hudson1 , Robert B. Gorman1 , Jane E. Butler1 and André De Troyer2
1
2

Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and the University of New South Wales, Sydney 2031, Australia
Laboratory of Cardiorespiratory Physiology, Brussels School of Medicine Unit and Chest Service, Erasme University Hospital, Brussels 1070, Belgium

The human parasternal intercostal muscles are obligatory inspiratory muscles with a diminishing
mechanical advantage from cranial to caudal interspaces. This study determined whether
inspiratory neural drive to these muscles is graded, and whether this distribution matches
regional differences in inspiratory mechanical advantage. To determine the neural drive,
intramuscular EMG was recorded from the first to the fifth parasternal intercostals during resting
breathing in six subjects. All interspaces showed phasic inspiratory activity but the onset of
activity relative to inspiratory flow in the fourth and fifth spaces was delayed compared with that
in cranial interspaces. Activity in the first, second and third interspaces commenced, on average,
within the first 10% of inspiratory time, and sometimes preceded inspiratory airflow. In contrast,
activity in the fourth and fifth interspaces began after an average 33% of inspiratory time. The
peak inspiratory discharge frequency of motor units in the first interspace averaged 13.4 ± 1.0 Hz
(mean ± S.E.M.) and was significantly greater than in all other interspaces, in particular in the fifth
space (8.0 ± 1.0 Hz). Phasic inspiratory activity was sometimes superimposed on tonic activity.
In the first interspace, only 3% of units had tonic firing, but this proportion increased to 34%
in the fifth space. In five subjects, recordings were also made from the medial and lateral extent
of the second parasternal intercostal. Both portions showed phasic inspiratory activity which
began within the first 6% of inspiratory time. Motor units from the lateral and medial portions
fired at the same peak discharge rate (10.4 ± 0.7 versus 10.7 ± 0.6 Hz). These observations
indicate that the distribution of neural drive to the parasternal intercostals in humans has a
rostrocaudal gradient, but that the drive is uniform along the mediolateral extent of the second
interspace. The distribution of inspiratory neural drive to the parasternal intercostals parallels
the spatial distribution of inspiratory mechanical advantage, while tonic activity was higher
where mechanical advantage was lower.
(Received 15 November 2005; accepted after revision 16 March 2006; first published online 23 March 2006)
Corresponding author S. Gandevia: Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Barker St Randwick,
NSW 2031 Australia. Email: s.gandevia@unsw.edu.au

Many muscles have an inspiratory action on the rib cage,
and during quiet breathing, the timing and amount of
their activity varies. In dogs and cats, electromyographic
activity during inspiration is not distributed equally
among the parasternal (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995;
Legrand et al. 1996a) and external intercostal muscles
(Greer & Martin, 1990; Legrand & De Troyer, 1999).
In both groups of muscles there are mediolateral and
rostrocaudal gradients of neural drive. In the dog, the
mechanical advantage of the intercostal muscles is not
uniform and the topographic distribution of mechanical
advantage parallels the distribution of neural drive during
breathing. Thus, muscles with a greater mechanical
advantage are activated to a greater extent, and they are
often activated earlier during inspiration (De Troyer et al.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

1996b, 1999; Legrand et al. 1996b; for review, see De Troyer
et al. 2005).
In humans, the inspiratory drive to the external
intercostal muscles was recently assessed (De Troyer et al.
2003). The third dorsal external intercostal, which has
a high mechanical advantage (Wilson et al. 2001), was
active earlier in inspiration, and its motor units discharged
at a faster rate than for lower external intercostals. As
for the dog, the degree of activation of the external
intercostals in humans during quiet breathing correlated
with the magnitude of their mechanical advantages
(De Troyer et al. 2003).
Human parasternal intercostal muscles are active during
inspiration (e.g. Tokizane et al. 1952; Taylor, 1960;
De Troyer & Sampson, 1982; Gandevia et al. 1996) and
DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.101915

264

S. C. Gandevia and others

have an inspiratory mechanical advantage (De Troyer et al.
1998). Their mechanical advantage diminishes fourfold
from the second to the fifth interspace, but it is not known if
neural drive to the human parasternal intercostal muscles
is graded across the interspaces. The neural drive along
the mediolateral extent of the muscles is also not known.
Therefore, in the present study, we have measured the
timing of activation and the discharge behaviour of single
motor units activated during inspiration in the parasternal
intercostals of the first to fifth interspaces, as well as along
the mediolateral extent of the second space. We have also
assessed the tonic activity of these units and correlated the
level of both inspiratory neural drive and tonic activity
with the known mechanical advantage of the muscles.
Methods
The studies were carried out in six healthy men of
44 ± 4.2 (mean ± s.e.m., range 29–54 years) years of age.
The subjects gave informed consent to the procedures,
which conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki and
were approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee
of the University of New South Wales. Three subjects had previously participated in many respiratory
experiments, but the other three had little or no prior
experience as respiratory subjects. Before the study these
subjects were just told that the purpose was to obtain
electrical recordings from several muscles of the rib cage
compartment of the chest wall. Two experiments were
performed: the first investigated the gradient of neural
drive in the first to fifth parasternal intercostal muscle
at sites close to the sternum, and the second investigated
the neural drive at the medial and lateral extent of the
parasternal intercostal in the second interspace. There were
no adverse consequences of the procedures.
Experiment 1

The medial portions of the parasternal intercostal muscles
in the first to fifth interspaces were about 1–2 cm lateral
from the sternal edge, and these sites were located by
palpitation. The potential recording sites were evaluated
on the right side in all six subjects with a 5 MHz ultrasound
linear probe (Acuson 128 X/P, Computed Sonography
System; Acuson Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA). While
the probe was placed perpendicular to the skin, the
parasternal intercostal was clearly visualized in each
subject, so its thickness and depth from the skin
surface could be measured with a built-in digital caliper.
Depending on the subject’s height and muscularity, the
thickness of the parasternal intercostal ranged between 2.5
and 6.8 mm, and the depth of its external layer relative to
the skin surface was between 13.5 and 40.0 mm. A topical
anaesthetic (Emla cream 5%) was then applied to the area
of skin marked for electrode insertion for ∼15 min.

J Physiol 573.1

For the experiment, each subject was seated comfortably
with all restrictive garments removed (see Fig. 1A).
The respiratory displacements of the chest wall were
monitored by inductance plethysmography (Respitrace;
Ambulatory Monitoring, Ardsley, NY, USA). The
inductance bands were positioned around the ribcage
at the level of the nipples and around the abdomen
at the level of the umbilicus, respectively, and the
gains on the two signals were adjusted by using the
conventional isovolume manoeuvre (Chadha et al. 1982).
No extraneous movements were permitted after this
calibration procedure. The subject was then grounded with
a large flexible strap on the right shoulder, and recordings
of parasternal intercostal EMG activity were made.
Recordings were made first from the parasternal
intercostal muscle in the second interspace using a
Teflon-coated monopolar electrode (Medelec DMG50;
Surrey, UK). The recordings were referenced to a surface
electrode positioned 2–3 cm away, and the EMG signal
was amplified and band-pass filtered below 53 Hz and
above 3000 Hz. Since this area had been examined by
ultrasonography, we could define in each individual
subject the maximal possible length of the needle track
and marked this on the electrode. The needle was
inserted perpendicular to the skin surface and advanced
in small steps through the pectoral muscles and into
the parasternal intercostal. Electromyographic activity
was continuously monitored on a loudspeaker and an
oscilloscope throughout the procedure, and once a site in
the parasternal intercostal was encountered that contained
audible and visible single motor unit activity with an
acceptable signal-to-noise ratio (> 3 : 1) during quiet
breathing or mild voluntary hyperpnoea, the audio signal
was removed and the subject was instructed to breathe
quietly for 1–2 min through a mouthpiece. After the run
was completed, the needle was repositioned at a slightly
different angle or different depth. In each subject, six to
nine sites were studied in the second parasternal intercostal
muscle.
Recordings were then made from the parasternal intercostal muscle in the remaining first, third, fourth and
fifth interspaces. The overall experimental procedure
was similar for each interspace except for the location,
and the depth of electrode insertion was reassessed in
reference to the sternal edge. As for the second interspace, 4–12 sites were recorded from the parasternal
intercostals in the remaining spaces. During recordings
from the third, fourth and fifth interspaces, the needle
occasionally entered the underlying triangularis sterni
muscle, which showed phasic expiratory activity. When
recording from the fifth interspace (studied last in all
subjects), the inductance band positioned around the
ribcage was removed to allow for insertion of the electrode,
but the band positioned around the abdomen was
retained.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

The changes in lung volume (obtained by integration
of the airflow signal), end-tidal P CO2 (measured via a port
on the pneumotachograph), and ribcage and abdomen
movements were checked to ensure that the subject was
breathing quietly. All signals were stored on computer via a
Cambridge Electronic Design 1401 interface (Cambridge,
UK) for subsequent analysis.
A mild transient ache was noted occasionally as the
needle penetrated the pectoral or parasternal intercostal
muscles, but this always subsided rapidly. Therefore, all

EMG recordings were obtained while the subjects had
minimal discomfort or none at all.
Experiment 2

Five subjects were subsequently studied usually in separate
sessions to assess neural inspiratory drive to both the
medial and lateral portions of the parasternal intercostal
muscle of the second interspace. The site for electrode
insertion into the medial portion of the muscle was

Figure 1. Experimental set-up for recordings from parasternal intercostal muscles and recording of single
motor-unit activity
A, subjects were comfortably seated and breathed via a mouthpiece. Volume was obtained by integration of
airflow signal. Inductance bands were placed around the chest and abdomen. In the first experiment recordings
were made using monopolar needle electrodes inserted into the first to fifth parasternal intercostals close to the
sternum. In the second, recordings were made in the second interspace at a medial and lateral location. Recording
sites are represented by the filled circles. B, a representative record of inspiratory EMG obtained in the parasternal
intercostal of the fourth interspace for two consecutive breaths. From top to bottom, panels show multiunit EMG,
airflow (inspiration upwards), and the instantaneous frequencies of two single motor units identified in this record
(denoted Units 1 and 2). All action potentials from the two units are superimposed, and shown in the right panel.
The discharge frequency of both units increases rapidly with the onset of inspiratory airflow, plateaus and then
gradually declines in the first part of expiration.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

265

266

S. C. Gandevia and others

∼10 mm lateral to the sternal edge. Posteroanterior radiographs of the chest at resting end-expiration were obtained
to define anatomical landmarks for subsequent insertion
of the electrode in the lateral portion of muscle. This was
necessary to help locate the costochondral junction and
thus the most lateral extent of the parasternal intercostal.
The distance from the midline to the second costochondral
junction ranged from 80 to 96 mm (mean 87.5 mm) and
the site for electrode insertion into the lateral portion of
the muscle was 10–20 mm medial to the costochondral
junction. The muscle in the lateral portion was thinner
than the medial portion, and ranged between 2.6 and
3.8 mm, compared to 5.3 and 7.1 mm in the medial
portion. The general procedure was similar to that used
in Experiment 1. In each subject, 6–11 sites were studied
from both the medial and lateral portion of the muscle in
each subject.

Data analysis

The magnitude of neural inspiratory drive to a given area of
parasternal intercostal muscle was assessed in three ways.
First, all periods of resting breathing (corresponding to
different recording sites in the muscle) were played into
a leaky integrator (decay time constant, 50 ms) and for
each period, the presence or absence of phasic inspiratory
activity in the integrated EMG (i.e. with a progressive
increase in the signal during the inspiratory phase of
the breathing cycle and a decrease in the signal during
the expiratory phase) was noted. Second, 10 consecutive
breaths from each period were examined to measure
the time of onset (T O ) of the integrated inspiratory
multiunit EMG relative to the onset of inspiratory
airflow. Inspiratory time (T I ) during these breaths was also
measured from the airflow signal. To allow comparison
between subjects, T I − T O for each breath was expressed
as a percentage of T I ; this percentage was less than 100
when activity started after the onset of inspiratory airflow
and greater than 100 when activity preceded the onset of
airflow.
The third method used to quantify neural drive was
based on measurement of the firing rates of single
motor units and has previously been described in detail
(Gandevia et al. 1996; De Troyer et al. 1997, 2003). Thus,
the periods of quiet breathing used for the first two analyses
were played into a commercial analysis package (Spike 2;
Cambridge Electronic Design), and trigger levels were
set manually to capture all spikes with an appropriate
signal-to-noise ratio. They were subsequently recalled and
manually sorted into one, two, three or four types or
‘templates’ based on their size and detailed morphology.
The interactive software allowed: (1) updating of the mean
shape of the template for each motor unit; (2) review of
the frequency plots of each single motor unit, together

J Physiol 573.1

with inspiratory flow and respiratory movements; and (3)
superimposition of all spikes from a particular motor unit.
Using this method, we could follow simultaneously the
discharge of up to four single motor units over several
consecutive breaths (Fig. 1B).
For each motor unit, the mean discharge frequency
was measured from the plateau in the last third of the
inspiratory phase during several consecutive breaths. Units
that discharged sporadically or very late in the breaths
with less than three interdischarge intervals were noted
but not included in the main analysis. One subject had
four units (1 in the first interspace, 2 in the third, and 1
in the fourth) which fired tonically without inspiratory
modulation and these units were not included in the
main analysis either. Several units, particularly in the
fourth and fifth interspaces, discharged tonically with
a superimposed inspiratory modulation. As this study
aimed to quantify the magnitude of neural inspiratory
drive, the discharge frequency of these units was taken
as the difference between the frequency in the last third
of the inspiratory phase and the tonic frequency during
expiration. The tonic discharge frequency was measured
from the plateau in the last third of expiration to avoid
an overestimation of the discharge frequency because of
any preceding post-inspiratory firing in early expiration.
To assess the onset of the inspiratory modulation of these
tonic units, several consecutive breaths were examined and
the time of onset (T O ) of inspiratory modulation (i.e. an
increase in frequency from the tonic baseline level) was
determined. As for the multiunit recordings, T I − T O for
each breath was expressed as a percentage of T I .
For each muscle area in each subject, the values
of the (T I − T O )/T I of multiunit activity for a given
recording site was averaged over the 10 breaths recorded
from that site, and the mean values thus obtained were
then averaged over all sites. Similarly (T I − T O )/T I of
the inspiratory modulation of the tonic units was also
averaged over all sites in an interspace. The firing rates
of the single motor units in the different recording
sites of a given muscle area were also averaged over all
units. In Experiment 1, statistical comparisons between
the different muscle areas were made in individual
subjects by analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated
measures and multiple comparison testing of the mean
values was performed, when appropriate, using the
Student-Newman-Keul post hoc procedure. The changes
in lung volume, inspiratory time, inspiratory flow, and
pattern of ribcage and abdominal displacement were
also compared. Comparison between the numbers of
recording sites in which multiunit EMG activity preceded
inspiratory airflow in different interspaces was made using
a Chi-squared analysis. The number of tonic units recorded
from each intercostal population was also compared
using a Chi-squared analysis. The tonic and inspiratory
modulation of firing rates, and onset time of these

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

267

Table 1. Pattern of breathing during electromyographic recordings
Tidal volume
(l)

Inspiratory
time
(s)

Inspiratory
flow
(l s−1 )

Ribcage contribution
to tidal volume
(%)

Experiment 1
Medial parasternal intercostal (1)
Medial parasternal intercostal (2)
Medial parasternal intercostal (3)
Medial parasternal intercostal (4)
Medial parasternal intercostal (5)

0.66 ± 0.03
0.66 ± 0.04
0.62 ± 0.03
0.59 ± 0.04
0.70 ± 0.06

2.11 ± 0.14
2.09 ± 0.13
2.07 ± 0.13
2.22 ± 0.19
2.34 ± 0.16∗

0.32 ± 0.02
0.32 ± 0.02
0.31 ± 0.02
0.27 ± 0.01†
0.03 ± 0.03

55.6 ± 5.1
56.7 ± 5.1
56.8 ± 6.1
56.8 ± 8.7
—

Experiment 2
Medial parasternal intercostal (2)
Lateral parasternal intercostal (2)

0.65 ± 0.03
0.65 ± 0.02

2.01 ± 0.20
2.07 ± 0.22

0.33 ± 0.03
0.33 ± 0.03

62.5 ± 6.9
60.3 ± 6.1

Values of Experiment 1 are means ± S.E.M. for six subjects; values of Expperiment 2 are means ± S.E.M. for five subjects.
Numbers in parentheses indicate the interspace recorded from. Ribcage contribution to tidal volume was not measured
during recordings from the fifth parasternal intercostal (see Methods). ∗ Significantly different from first, second and
third interspaces, †significantly different from the first and second interspaces (P < 0.05).

tonic units were also averaged, and comparisons across
parasternal intercostal spaces were made by a Spearman
rank correlation. In Experiment 2, statistical comparisons
between the two muscle areas, and respiratory variables,
were made in individual subjects with Student’s unpaired
t tests. Statistical comparison of the linear relationship
between neural drive and mechanical advantage between
intercostal muscles was made by analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) with the number of motor unit spikes as the
dependent variable, muscle as the factor, and mechanical
advantage as the covariant. The criterion for statistical
significance was taken as P < 0.05.
Results
The indices of the pattern of breathing during recordings
from the parasternal intercostal muscles in both
experimental protocols are summarized in Table 1. The
pattern of breathing during each experiment was largely
consistent. However, in Experiment 1, slight but significant
differences were noted for two respiratory variables.
Inspiratory flow was lower during recordings from the
fourth interspace and T I was longer during recordings
from the fifth space. It is unlikely that these small changes
in respiratory pattern affected our main conclusions (see
Discussion).
Medial parasternal intercostal muscles
(Experiment 1)

Representative recordings from the medial parasternal
intercostal muscle in the first and fourth interspaces from
one subject are shown in Fig. 2. Activity in the first
parasternal intercostal appeared early relative to the onset
of inspiratory flow (vertical dashed lines in Fig. 2A) and
persisted after cessation of inspiratory airflow. In 5 of 6

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

subjects, activity in several sites in this muscle started at or
prior to the onset of inspiratory airflow (range, 4–213 ms
before flow), such that in 52% of all sites recorded from all
subjects, multiunit activity preceded inspiratory airflow. In
comparison with the first interspace, the onset of activity in
the fourth space was delayed and did not commence until
well into inspiration (vertical dashed lines in Fig. 2B), and
activity preceded inspiratory airflow in only one site in
one subject (by 13 ms). Activity in the fifth interspace also
began later, and in one subject it showed no respiratory
modulation during quiet breathing. Also, in the fifth
interspace, the proportion of sites in which activity
preceded inspiratory airflow was zero, significantly less
(P < 0.001) than the proportion in the first space.
The relative onset time of inspiratory activity
((T I − T O )/T I , see Methods) in the five interspaces for the
medial parasternal intercostal muscles is shown in Fig. 3A.
Activity commenced earlier in the more cranial interspaces
for all subjects, such that (T I − T O )/T I in the first space
was 99.6 ± 2.5% (mean ± s.e.m) and only a little less in
the second and third spaces. However, (T I − T O )/T I was
significantly less in the fourth and fifth interspaces and
declined to 57.3 ± 8.0% in the fifth space (P < 0.001).
In each parasternal intercostal space, the activity of
47–81 single motor units was recorded and exhibited either
purely inspiratory phasic activity (Fig. 1B), or inspiratory
modulation of tonic activity (Fig. 4A). However, one
subject had no inspiratory modulation in the fifth
interspace during quiet breathing, and only tonic activity
was noted. The average increase in discharge rates
at end-inspiration (i.e. excluding tonic firing during
expiration; see Methods) of motor units in the medial
portion of the five parasternal intercostal muscles is shown
in Fig. 3B. The discharge rate of motor units varied
systematically. It was highest in the first interspace, at
13.4 ± 1.0 Hz, and was significantly greater than that of

268

S. C. Gandevia and others

the lower spaces (P < 0.05). The discharge frequency in
the second interspace was also greater than in the fifth
space, which fired at the lowest frequency, at 8.0 ± 1.0 Hz.
The average number of inspiratory motor units identified
in each recording site was 2.5 units per site in the first
interspace, but only 1.4 in the fifth space. The peak
discharge frequency of all units coincided with the last
third of inspiration, but across all interspaces, some
units exhibited post-inspiratory activity. The large units
with a higher threshold (and usually larger amplitude
spikes) tended to fire late in inspiration and stop
firing at peak inspiration (e.g. Fig. 2B), whereas earlier
recruited units continued firing in early expiration (e.g.
Fig. 1B).
Of the 365 units identified with inspiratory activity,
69 (18.9%) discharged tonically throughout expiration
(Fig. 4A), with an average firing rate of 7.1 ± 0.2 Hz

J Physiol 573.1

(range, 2.9–12.9 Hz). However, as shown in Fig. 4B, the
proportion of units which fired tonically in the different
interspaces was also different. Few units in the first
interspace (3.7 ± 3.1%) had tonic activity. This proportion
increased gradually in the caudal direction such that in
the fifth interspace, it was 34.0 ± 14.4% (P < 0.001). The
average firing rate of these tonic units in expiration did
not differ between interspaces and ranged from 6.5 Hz
to 7.5 Hz (P > 0.05; Fig. 4C). However, the inspiratory
modulation of these tonically firing units did differ. As for
the entire population of units (Fig. 3A), the inspiratory
modulation of tonic units was greatest in the first, second
and third parasternal intercostal spaces (range, 6.1–6.3 Hz)
and lower in the fourth and fifth spaces (3.8 Hz; P < 0.05;
Fig. 4C). The relative onset time of inspiratory modulation
of these tonic units was similar across the five interspaces;
it was 105.1 ± 10.6% (range, 85.2–121.2%) for the first

Figure 2. Data from a single subject for recordings from the first and fourth parasternal intercostal
muscles close to the sternum
Recordings of airflow, abdominal movement, and parasternal intercostal EMG are shown. Inspiration is upwards in
the airflow and movement traces. Vertical calibrations: 100 μV. A, recordings from the first parasternal intercostal
with the onset of activity shown by vertical dotted lines. Phasic activity commenced close to the onset of inspiratory
airflow and there was some tonic activity. B, corresponding data for the fourth parasternal intercostal. Phasic
inspiratory activity began well after the onset of inspiratory airflow. Some far-field activity from the triangularis
sterni muscle is evident during expiration.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

space, and 93.3 ± 3.5% (range, 62% – 104%) for the fifth
space (P > 0.05).
Medial versus lateral parasternal intercostal muscle
(Experiment 2)

Representative EMG recordings from the medial and
lateral portions of the second parasternal intercostal
muscle are shown in Fig. 5. Both had activity in
phase with inspiration which began with the onset of
inspiratory airflow (vertical dashed lines, Fig. 5) and
peak activity occurred later during inspiration. Early
activation was observed in both portions in all subjects,
with activity in some sites preceding inspiratory airflow
(range, 9–59 ms before flow). Consequently, as shown in
Fig. 6A, (T I − T O )/T I in the medial portion of the second
parasternal intercostal was 95.9 ± 2.1%, and did not
differ (P > 0.05) from that in the lateral portion (93.7 ±
3.0%).
For the five subjects, 74 single units (13–17 units per
subject) were identified in the medial portion of the
parasternal intercostal muscle, and 80 units (14–18 units
per subject) in the lateral portion. The discharge rates
of all units increased with inspiration and the average
peak firing frequency of units in the medial portion
was 10.7 ± 0.6 Hz. This was similar to the discharge rate
in the lateral portion (10.4 ± 0.7 Hz; P > 0.05; Fig. 6B).
All units showed phasic inspiratory modulation, but
a proportion fired tonically throughout expiration. In
the medial portion 9.5 ± 6.6% units fired tonically with
an average discharge rate in expiration of 6.9 ± 0.6 Hz
(range, 3.5–8.7 Hz), and 12.5 ± 7.2% of units in the lateral

portion fired tonically with an average discharge rate of
5.8 ± 0.4 Hz (range, 3.5–7.6 Hz). The proportion of total
units recorded which had tonic activity was similar in the
medial and lateral portions (P > 0.05; Fig. 6C).
Discussion
We have shown for the first time that there is spatial
and temporal distribution of neural drive in the human
parasternal intercostal muscles. This is indicated by
changes in the timing of the onset of inspiratory activity
and in the discharge frequency of populations of single
motor units across the interspaces. However, there is no
change in these parameters along the mediolateral extent
of the second parasternal intercostal space.
Validity of the methods used to assess neural drive

The level of neural drive to inspiratory muscles has been
assessed by measurement of the discharge properties of
populations of single motor units (Gandevia et al. 1996;
Butler et al. 2001; De Troyer et al. 2003). This technique
eliminates the difficulties associated with other EMG
methods of quantifying neural drive to these muscles
such as contamination due to activity in adjacent muscles,
recording artifacts due to changes in muscle length, and the
need to normalize the level of drive during quiet breathing
to that in another respiratory manoeuvre (De Troyer et al.
2003).
The single-unit technique has limitations because we
have used rate coding by motoneurones to quantify the
magnitude of drive. Increased force production is also

Figure 3. Rostrocaudal gradient of neural drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles
Data from recordings in the first to the fifth parasternal intercostal spaces close to the sternum for the six subjects.
A, the duration of the phasic inspiratory activity is indicated relative to total inspiratory time ((T I − T O )/T I
percentage), shown as the mean ± S.E.M. Inspiratory activity in the parasternal intercostals began close to the
onset of airflow in the first and second interspaces but was delayed in the more caudal spaces. B, mean peak
discharge rates (± S.E.M.) for the group of subjects derived from the inspiratory firing frequency of 79 units in the
first interspace, 81 in the second, 80 in the third, 78 in the fourth, and 47 units in the fifth space. The discharge
rate was greatest in the parasternal intercostal in the first interspace, and this rate decreased caudally.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

269

270

S. C. Gandevia and others

achieved by recruitment of new motor units (Adrian
& Bronk, 1929; Henneman & Mendell, 1981), but the
current method does not quantify the total number of
units recruited. Although not studied formally, we found
more inspiratory motor units per recording site in the
first interspace, compared to the fifth space (2.5 versus 1.4
units per site). Therefore, it is likely that not only was the
discharge rate lower in the caudal interspaces (Fig. 3B),
but there were relatively fewer units with inspiratory
firing. In addition, the rostrocaudal gradient of motor unit
discharge activity in the parasternal intercostal muscles has
a similar spatial distribution to the timing of the onset of
multiunit activity during quiet breathing (Fig. 3A and B).
In the intercostal muscles of the dog, greater activation
is associated with an earlier onset of inspiratory activity
(De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; Legrand et al. 1996a; Leduc
et al. 2000).

J Physiol 573.1

A second limitation of this technique is that single
motor unit recordings from parasternal intercostal muscle
of different interspaces were made during different
periods of quiet breathing. As neural drive increases with
inspiratory flow (Clark & von Euler, 1972), parasternal
intercostal activity in the fourth interspace may have been
slightly underestimated as inspiratory flow was low during
recordings from this space (Table 1). However, across the
other interspaces, when inspiratory flow was similar, the
greatest activation was in the first and second spaces
and lowest in the fifth space. This suggests that neural
drive to the parasternal intercostals gradually decreases
caudally, and it is unlikely that the neural drive to the
fourth interspace was greatly underestimated. A slightly
longer T I during recordings from the fifth interspace
may have affected the timing of activity onset, with an
underestimation of (T I − T O )/T I . However, the discharge

Figure 4. Tonic activity in the parasternal intercostal muscles
Data from recordings in the first to the fifth parasternal intercostal spaces close to the sternum for six subjects.
A, example from a single subject of the discharge of a parasternal intercostal motor unit in the fifth interspace with
tonic activity. Parasternal intercostal EMG, inspiratory airflow and the instantaneous frequency of the single motor
unit identified in this record are shown. This motor unit exhibited continuous activity throughout the respiratory
cycle, but has distinct inspiratory modulation of approximately 5 Hz in each breath. Vertical calibration: 400 μV.
B, the percentage of the total number of motor units recorded in each interspace which had tonic activity. The
occurrence of tonic activity was more common in the more caudal interspaces. C, mean discharge rates (± S.E.M.)
for the group of subjects of the units with tonic activity. The average firing frequency of these units during expiration
was similar across interspaces (open bars), but the average inspiratory modulation differed (grey bars). The units
in the first interspace had the greatest modulation and the greatest peak firing rate during inspiration, whereas
inspiratory modulation was lowest for the units in the fifth space. The average frequencies were derived from the
firing frequency of 3 units in the first interspace (from one subject), 11 in the second (two subjects), 20 in the third
(four subjects), 19 in the fourth (four subjects), and 16 units in the fifth space (five subjects).

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

rate of motor units in the fifth interspace was also low,
confirming the low drive to this space. The absence of
phasic inspiratory activity in the fifth interspace in one
subject supports this view.
Uneven drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

A topographic distribution of neural drive to intercostal
muscles has been observed in the human external
intercostal muscles (De Troyer et al. 2003), as well as in
feline and canine intercostal muscles (Greer & Martin,
1990; De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; Legrand et al. 1996a;
Legrand & De Troyer, 1999). The mechanism responsible
for the graded activation in the intercostal muscles has
not been determined. In the anaesthetized dog, afferent
inputs do not determine the spatial distribution of activity
in the parasternal intercostal muscles as the distribution is
preserved when input from the lungs, diaphragm and chest
wall is removed (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995; De Troyer
et al. 1996a; Legrand et al. 1996a). In human intercostal

muscles, local inputs can modulate reflex responses to brief
airway occlusions (Butler et al. 1995; Butler et al. 1997),
but their role in graded muscle activation during quiet
breathing is unclear.
There is limited information on whether drive from
inspiratory bulbospinal neurons has a rostrocaudal
or mediolateral gradient of intercostal thoracic spaces
(for review, see De Troyer et al. 2005). Davies et al.
(1985) compared recordings from bulbospinal neurons
innervating the dorsal external intercostal muscles
of six different interspaces in the cat. The overall
strength of connections varied, but there was no graded
change along a rostrocaudal axis. In addition, the total
average depolarization generated by these monosynaptic
connections was estimated to be small relative to the
overall depolarization of the external intercostal
motoneurones (Merrill & Lipski, 1987).
Muscle recruitment is also determined by the intrinsic
properties of the motoneurones. The motoneurones
of limb muscles are recruited by their size-related

Figure 5. Recordings in one subject at a medial and lateral location from the second parasternal intercostal muscle
Inspiratory airflow, ribcage movement, and parasternal intercostal EMG are shown. Inspiration is upwards in the
airflow and movement trace. Vertical calibrations: 200 μV. A, recording from a medial site close to the sternum.
Vertical dotted lines indicate the onset of EMG activity. B, corresponding data for the lateral recording. Phasic
inspiratory activity began close to the onset of airflow for recordings at both the medial and lateral location in the
parasternal intercostal space.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

271

272

S. C. Gandevia and others

excitability, known as the ‘size principle’ (Henneman,
1957; Henneman & Mendell, 1981). If this holds for
intercostal muscles, we would expect a topographic
distribution of motoneurone and motor fibre types across
the intercostal spaces. Fibre type composition is a good
indicator of motoneuronal properties (Henneman &
Mendell, 1981), but it is not known if the fibre type
composition of human parasternal intercostal muscles
differs across interspaces. In the dog, there is no difference
in fibre type proportions between intercostal spaces, or
between medial and lateral portions of an interspace
(De Troyer et al. 1996a; Legrand et al. 1996a). Within the
limits of sampling error in humans (Elder et al. 1982),
the fibre type composition of the external intercostal
muscles from the fifth and eighth interspaces appears
similar for the proportion of slow-twitch oxidative fibres
(Mizuno & Secher, 1989). If muscle fibre type were the
only determinant of firing we would expect that the onset
of activation in these two interspaces to be the same. This
is not the case. Activity in the seventh external intercostal
is lower and delayed relative to that in the fifth (De Troyer
et al. 2003). Hence, the distribution of drive and motor
unit discharge rate may not solely be determined by an
intrinsic, size-related, property of the motoneurones.
A modulatory mechanism which modifies the
descending drive to the motoneurones may be responsible
for the topographic distribution of drive to intercostal
muscles. Respiratory interneurones with inspiratory firing
patterns have been identified in the spinal cord of
the cat (Lipski & Duffin, 1986; Kirkwood et al. 1988;
Bellingham & Lipski, 1990), and these interneurones
may contribute to central respiratory drive potentials
in respiratory motoneurones. Anatomical and electrophysiological results suggest respiratory interneurones

J Physiol 573.1

project between spinal segments (Lipski & Duffin, 1986)
and to the contralateral ventral horn (Schmid et al. 1993),
but the exact role of interneurones in respiratory motor
function has not been determined. It has been speculated
that there is a propriospinal system for phrenic and
intercostal motoneurones similar to the system for
forelimb motoneurones (Lipski & Duffin, 1986). In theory,
this would allow for common modulation or integration
of either involuntary drive from the medulla during quiet
breathing, or volitional drive from the motor cortex
(Macefield & Gandevia, 1991). However, a more detailed
assessment of the respiratory interneurones is required
before it is concluded that they mediate the topographic
distribution of inspiratory drive between different regions
of the thorax. Central inspiratory drive may also be
modulated by mechanisms which alter the ‘gain’ of the
respiratory motoneurones. Active dendritic mechanisms
involving persistent inward currents (Heckman et al.
2003), or ligand-gated channel-mediated synaptic inputs
(Berger, 2000; Zhan et al. 2000) may amplify synaptic
signals in some motoneurones. Regional differences in the
density of serotonergic inputs in the canine parasternal
intercostal muscles reflect the topographic distribution of
inspiratory activity in this muscle (Zhan et al. 2000).
Neural drive matches the topographic distribution
of mechanical advantage

The present study has revealed that the distribution of
inspiratory drive to the human parasternal intercostal
muscles is closely matched to the distribution of their
inspiratory mechanical advantage. Figure 7 shows this
relationship for the parasternal intercostals (filled circles)
and compares it with that for the external intercostals

Figure 6. Mediolateral gradient of neural drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles
Data from recordings in medial and lateral portions of the second parasternal intercostal space for five subjects.
A, the duration of the phasic inspiratory activity is indicated relative to total inspiratory time ((T I − T O )/T I
percentage), shown as mean ± S.E.M. B, data for the mean (± S.E.M.) inspiratory peak firing rate at the medial
and lateral locations. There was no difference in the onset of activity, or the discharge frequency of motor units
recorded from the two locations in the second parasternal intercostal. C, the percentage of total units with tonic
activity, recorded from medial and lateral portions of the second parasternal intercostal space. The occurrence of
tonic activity was similar at the two sites.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

(open circles). Mechanical advantage was taken from
the data of De Troyer et al. (1998), and the number of
motor unit discharges during inspiration was calculated
by multiplying the average discharge rate (Fig. 3B) by
the duration of firing in inspiration (Fig. 3A). Although
the two sets of data shown in Fig. 7 were collected from
different subjects, each has a strong linear relationship
(coefficient of correlation, r 2 = 0.99 for both muscle
groups). The average number of motor unit discharges
during inspiration for the parasternal intercostals in
the third interspace has been determined previously
(De Troyer et al. 2003), and is similar to that in the present
study (Fig. 7, cross versus filled circle). The relationship
in Fig. 7 allows estimation of the mechanical advantage of
the parasternal intercostal in the first interspace based on
its inspiratory neural drive (∼3% per litre). The complex
geometry of the fibres in this particular interspace had
precluded computation of its mechanical advantage using
computed tomography (De Troyer et al. 1998).
Further evidence for the link between neural drive and
mechanical advantage is observed for the mediolateral
extent of the human parasternal intercostal muscle. All
the indices of neural drive were identical for the medial
and lateral end of the second intercostal space (Fig. 6). In
humans, there is minimal change in angulation of fibres
along a parasternal intercostal, and the costal cartilages in
the first to third interspaces are nearly parallel (De Troyer
et al. 1998). Therefore, in these interspaces, the mechanical
advantage of the muscle fibres near the costochondral
junction is about the same as that of the fibres in the vicinity
of the sternum (De Troyer et al. 1998). On the other hand,
in the dog, there is a mediolateral gradient of mechanical
advantage for the parasternal intercostals in every
interspace, and this is associated with a strong gradient
of inspiratory neural drive (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995;
Legrand et al. 1996b). This species difference strengthens
Figure 7. Relationship between the
inspiratory firing of the parasternal
intercostal muscles and their
mechanical advantage
Data for mechanical advantage is
derived from
De Troyer et al. (1998). Open circles
show data for the external intercostals
(from De Troyer et al. 2003). Data for
the parasternal intercostals are shown
as filled circles (current study). The
y-axis shows the number of motor unit
spikes during inspiration, calculated
from the mean group data for each
intercostal muscle (see text). The cross
shows data for the third parasternal
intercostal from the study of De Troyer
et al. (2003). Simple linear regressions
are shown. There is an increase in
inspiratory neural drive to the regions
of the intercostal muscles with the
higher mechanical advantage.

C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

273

the argument that inspiratory neural drive and mechanical
advantage are linked.
Figure 7 also shows that the linear relationship between
neural drive and inspiratory mechanical advantage
differs in slope for the parasternal and external
intercostal muscles (P < 0.05). The relationship is steeper
for the external intercostals during quiet breathing.
The different relationship between neural drive and
mechanical advantage of the parasternal and external
intercostals may reflect differences in their operating
lengths relative to their optimal length. Overall, neural
drive may be set to maximize the efficiency of breathing.
The metabolic cost of rib elevation is minimized if the work
done by various muscles lifting it is distributed according
to the size of their mechanical advantages (De Troyer et al.
2005).
Tonic activity in the parasternal intercostal muscles

Any assessment of tonic and phasic drive to human
parasternal and external intercostal muscles should take
into account not only their obligatory inspiratory firing
(Tokizane et al. 1952; Taylor, 1960; Gandevia et al. 1996;
De Troyer et al. 2003), but their contraction in voluntary
and postural tasks (e.g. Gandevia et al. 1990; Whitelaw et al.
1992; Rimmer et al. 1995). The present study provides
new data about the tonic firing of human parasternal
intercostals. Although inspiratory activity decreases
caudally, the incidence of tonic firing throughout the
respiratory cycle increases from 4% of units in the first
interspace to 34% in the fifth space (Fig. 4B). Therefore,
during sitting, the parasternal intercostals in caudal
interspaces may have greater postural functions compared
to the more rostral spaces.
The timing of the increase from tonic firing in the
parasternal intercostals was similar across the spaces, but

274

S. C. Gandevia and others

we encountered some units which did not increase their
discharge until over 200 ms of inspiratory flow. Such a
delay in the inspiratory modulation of tonically firing
units has also been observed in the dorsal external
intercostal in the fifth interspace (unpublished
observations). This delay suggests that the neural
mechanisms causing the gradient in the onset of
inspiratory firing may occur at a premotoneuronal site, at
a spinal or supraspinal level. Alternatively, local factors
causing sustained motoneuronal depolarization may be
responsible.
There is spatial distribution of neural drive to
the human parasternal intercostal muscles along a
rostrocaudal gradient during quiet breathing. The
inspiratory drive to the muscles mirrors their inspiratory
mechanical advantage, and peaks rostrally. In contrast, the
occurrence of tonic activity, which may reflect postural
drive, is greater in the caudal spaces. Along the mediolateral
extent of the second parasternal intercostal space, there is
no difference in neural drive, mechanical advantage or
occurrence of tonic firing.
References
Adrian ED & Bronk DW (1929). The discharge of impulses in
motor nerve fibres. Part 2. The frequency of discharge in
reflex and voluntary contractions. J Physiol 67, 119–151.
Bellingham MC & Lipski J (1990). Respiratory interneurons in
the C5 segment of the spinal cord of the cat. Brain Res 533,
141–146.
Berger AJ (2000). Determinants of respiratory motoneuron
output. Respir Physiol 122, 259–269.
Butler JE, McKenzie DK, Crawford MR & Gandevia SC (1995).
Role of airway receptors in the reflex responses of human
inspiratory muscles to airway occlusion. J Physiol 487,
273–281.
Butler JE, McKenzie DK & Gandevia SC (2001). Discharge
frequencies of single motor units in human diaphragm and
parasternal muscles in lying and standing. J Appl Physiol 90,
147–154.
Butler JE, McKenzie DK, Glanville AR & Gandevia SC (1997).
Pulmonary afferents are not necessary for the reflex
inhibition of human inspiratory muscles produced by airway
occlusion. J Neurophysiol 78, 170–176.
Chadha TS, Watson H, Birch S, Jenouri GA, Schneider AW,
Cohn MA & Sackner MA (1982). Validation of respiratory
inductive plethysmography using different calibration
procedures. Am Rev Respir Dis 125, 644–649.
Clark FJ & von Euler C (1972). On the regulation of depth and
rate of breathing. J Physiol 222, 267–295.
Davies JG, Kirkwood PA & Sears TA (1985). The distribution of
monosynaptic connexions from inspiratory bulbospinal
neurones to inspiratory motoneurones in the cat. J Physiol
368, 63–87.
De Troyer A, Gorman RB & Gandevia SC (2003). Distribution
of inspiratory drive to the external intercostal muscles in
humans. J Physiol 546, 943–954.

J Physiol 573.1

De Troyer A, Kirkwood PA & Wilson TA (2005). Respiratory
action of the intercostal muscles. Physiol Rev 85,
717–756.
De Troyer A, Leeper JB, McKenzie DK & Gandevia SC (1997).
Neural drive to the diaphragm in patients with severe COPD.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 155, 1335–1340.
De Troyer A & Legrand A (1995). Inhomogenous activation of
the parasternal intercostals during breathing. J Appl Physiol
79, 55–62.
De Troyer A, Legrand A, Gayan-Ramirez G, Cappello M &
Decramer M (1996a). On the mechanism of the mediolateral
gradient of parasternal activation. J Appl Physiol 80,
1490–1494.
De Troyer A, Legrand A, Gevenois P-A & Wilson TA (1998).
Mechanical advantage of the human parasternal intercostal
and triangularis sterni muscles. J Physiol 513, 915–925.
De Troyer A, Legrand A & Wilson TA (1996b). Rostrocaudal
gradient of mechanical advantage in the parasternal
intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495, 239–246.
De Troyer A, Legrand A & Wilson TA (1999). Respiratory
mechanical advantage of the canine external and internal
intercostal muscles. J Physiol 518, 283–289.
De Troyer A & Sampson MG (1982). Activation of the
parasternal intercostals during breathing efforts in human
subjects. J Appl Physiol 52, 524–529.
Elder GC, Bradbury K & Roberts R (1982). Variability of fiber
type distributions within human muscles. J Appl Physiol 53,
1473–1480.
Gandevia SC, Leeper JB, McKenzie DK & De Troyer A (1996).
Discharge frequencies of parasternal intercostal and scalene
motor units during breathing in normal and COPD subjects.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 153, 622–628.
Gandevia SC, McKenzie DK & Plassman BL (1990). Activation
of human respiratory muscles during different voluntary
manoeuvres. J Physiol 428, 387–403.
Greer JJ & Martin TP (1990). Distribution of muscle fibre types
and EMG activity in cat intercostal muscles. J Appl Physiol
69, 1208–1211.
Heckman CJ, Lee RH & Brownstone RM (2003).
Hyperexcitable dendrites in motoneurones and their
neuromodulatory control during motor behavior. Trends
Neurosci 26, 688–695.
Henneman E (1957). Relation between size of neurons and
their susceptibility to discharge. Science 126,
1345–1347.
Henneman E & Mendell LM (1981). Functional organisation of
motoneuron pool and its inputs. In Handbook of Physiology,
section 3, The Nervous System, ed. Geiger SR, pp. 423–508.
Waverly Press, Inc., Baltimore.
Kirkwood PA, Munson JB, Sears TA & Westgaard RH (1988).
Respiratory interneurones in the thoracic spinal cord of the
cat. J Physiol 395, 161–192.
Leduc D, Brunko E & De Troyer A (2000). Response of the
canine inspiratory intercostal muscles to chest wall vibration.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161, 510–516.
Legrand A, Brancatisano A, Decramer M & De Troyer A
(1996a). Rostrocaudal gradient of the electrical activation in
the parasternal intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495,
247–254.


C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 573.1

Inspiratory drive to the parasternal intercostal muscles

Legrand A & De Troyer A (1999). Spatial distribution of
external and internal intercostal activity in dogs. J Physiol
518, 291–300.
Legrand A, Wilson TA & De Troyer A (1996b). Mediolateral
gradient of mechanical advantage in the canine parasternal
intercostals. J Appl Physiol 80, 2097–2101.
Lipski J & Duffin J (1986). An electrophysiological
investigation of propriospinal inspiratory neurons in the
upper cervical cord of the cat. Exp Brain Res 61, 625–637.
Macefield G & Gandevia SC (1991). The cortical drive to
human respiratory muscles in the awake state assessed by
premotor cerebral potentials. J Physiol 439, 545–558.
Merrill EG & Lipski J (1987). Inputs to intercostal
motoneurons from ventrolateral medullary repsiratory
neurons in the cat. J Neurophysiol 57, 1837–1852.
Mizuno M & Secher NH (1989). Histochemical characteristics
of human expiratory and inspiratory intercostal muscles.
J Appl Physiol 67, 592–598.
Rimmer KP, Ford GT & Whitelaw WA (1995). Interaction
between postural and respiratory control of human
intercostal muscles. J Appl Physiol 79, 1556–1561.
Schmid K, Kirkwood PA, Munson JB, Shen E & Sears TA
(1993). Contralateral projections of thoracic respiratory
interneurones in the cat. J Physiol 461, 647–665.


C 2006 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2006 The Physiological Society

275

Taylor A (1960). The contribution of the intercostal muscles to
the effort of respiration in man. J Physiol 151, 390–402.
Tokizane T, Kawamata K & Tokizane H (1952).
Electromyographic studies on the human respiratory
muscles; studies on the activity pattern of neuromuscular
units. Jpn J Physiol 2, 232–247.
Whitelaw WA, Ford GT, Rimmer KP & De Troyer A (1992).
Intercostal muscles are used during rotation of the thorax in
humans. J Appl Physiol 72, 1940–1944.
Wilson TA, Legrand A, Gevenois P-A & De Troyer A (2001).
Respiratory effects of the external and internal intercostal
muscles in humans. J Physiol 530, 319–330.
Zhan WZ, Mantilla CB, Zhan P, Bitton A, Prakash YS, de
Troyer A & Sieck GC (2000). Regional differences in
serotonergic input to canine parasternal intercostal
motoneurons. J Appl Physiol 88, 1581–1589.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Health
and Medical Research Council.

