Shoulder muscle moment arms during
horizontal flexion and elevation
David K. Kuechle, MD, Stephen R. Newman, MD, Eiji Itoi, MD, Bernard F. Morrey, MD,
and Kai-Nan An, PhD, Roschester,Minn.
The instantaneous muscle moment arms of 10 shoulder muscles including the three
portions of the deltoid and the rotator cuff and scapulohumeral muscle groups during
four specified glenohumeral motions were calculated. Moment arm values were
derived from a plot of tendon excursion versus glenohumeral joint rotation angle
during horizontal flexion along the 90 ° elevation plane and elevation in the sagittal,
scapular, and coronal planes. The deltoid had the largest moment arm in elevation.
The anterior deltoid has a larger moment arm in the anterior planes, whereas the
midportion is greater in the scapular and coronal planes. The muscles with the
largest depressor (adductor) moment arms are the pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi,
and teres maior. Contrary to the findings of other investigators, the supraspinatus
and infraspinatus have a smaller potential elevation torque in the scapular plane
than has been previously reported. Furthermore the subscapularis may potentially be
a more important elevator in the scapular plane than either the supraspinatus or
infraspinatus, especially in the latter phases of motion. The pectoralis major has the
largest horizontal flexion moment arm with the humerus elevated 90 °, whereas the
posterior deltoid and infraspinatus have the largest horizontal extension moment
arms in this plane. (J SHOULDERELeOWSUR~ 1997;6:429-39.)
The kinematics of the shoulder girdle are complex,
resulting from the interaction among four joints, the
surrounding muscles, and the capsuloligamentous
constraints. Understanding the mechanics of the
shoulder requires an appreciation of the articulations, an awareness of the relative position of the
humeral head with respect-to the glenoid, and a
knowledge of the internal and external forces
involved. The internal forces are essentially those
generated by the shoulder muscles. The purpose of
this study is to define the instantaneous muscle
moment arms of 10 shoulder muscles during selected motions of the glenohumeral joint. The main
motors and stabilizers of the shoulder including
muscles of the thoracohumeral group, the rotator
From the Departmentof Orthopedic Surgeryand the BiomechanJcs
Laboratory, Mayo Clinic.
Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health
(AR41171) and the Orthopedic Researchand Education Foundation.
Reprint requests: Kai-Nan An, PhD, Mayo Clinic, Orthopedic
Biomechanics Laboratory, Rochester,MN 55905.
Copyright © 1997 by Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery
Board of Trustees.
1058-2746/97/$5.00 + 0 3 2 / ! / 8 1 4 5 3

cuff, and the three portions of the deltoid were
studied.
The motion of the humerus is controlled by forces
and torques applied by the muscles, ligaments,
and bony articulations at the glenohumeral joint.
Muscles generate straight line forces that are converted to torques in proportion to the perpendicular
distance between the joint center of rotation and
the muscle line of action. This distance, called the
moment arm, is the focus of this study.
Defining the effective moment arm of the individual shoulder muscles provides basic information
needed to understand the control of movement and
stability of the glenohumeral joint. In combination
with electromyographic measurements, moment
arms can be used to determine which muscles are
acting as stabilizers and which are acting as
movers for a given joint configuration. This information may in turn be useful in developing appropriate strengthening and rehabilitation protocols
for the shoulder or for modeling the shoulder
complex.
Attempts to understand shoulder kinematics
have met with limited success perhaps because of
difficulty in accurately describing the shoulder's
429

430

Kuechle et al.

complex motions or the lack of a universal reference system on which to base measurements.
Nevertheless, several investigators have tried to
elucidate shoulder muscle moment arms for relatively few motions. 3, 5, e, lo, 12
In a previous article An et a17 discussed three
techniques available for determining muscle moment arm based on measurement of articular geometry, direct load, or tendon and joint displacement. Most previous studies used the geometric
technique, which relies on either biplanar radiographs or serial cross-sectional measurements to
generate moment arm data? ,5,8, 12 One disadvantage of the biplanar radiography method is the
difficulty of precisely defining the center of joint
rotation. In addition, it is only practical to study a
few specific static positions. The primary limitation
of the serial cross-sectional technique is that it
permits evaluation of only a single joint configuration per specimen, and at the same time the
definition of the joint center of rotation must be
approximated.
Another way to calculate the moment arm uses
tendon excursion and joint displacement data. This
method offers the advantage of allowing study of
virtually unlimited joint configurations in three dimensions. Furthermore a reliable value for the
moment arm can be calculated without determination of the precise center of joint rotation7 The
instantaneous moment arm in the plane of motion
at a specified joint configuration may be determined by considering the tendon excursion as a
function of joint rotation and calculating the derivative.
In this study the tendon excursion/joint displacement data technique was used to calculate the
instantaneous shoulder muscle moment arms during selected motions of the glenohumeral joint.
MATERIAL A N D METHODS
Twelve fresh-frozen cadaveric forequarter specimens were chosen (seven right, five left) from
subjects ranging in age from 33 to 80 years with a
mean age of 59 years. Before dissection was
performed, roentgenograms of all shoulders were
obtained, and those with evidence of degenerative
changes were eliminated. Specimen dissection followed carefully defined steps. In the thawed specimen the skin and subcutaneous tissue, pectoralis
minor, trapezius, and coracobrachialis muscles
were carefully dissected free and removed. The
latissimus dorsi, pectoralis major, and triceps were

J. ShoulderElbow Surg.
September/October 1997

divided at the musculotendinous junction, and the
muscle bellies were removed. The remaining musculature including the supraspinatus, infraspinatus,
teres major and minor, subscapularis, and the
anterior, middle, and posterior portions of the
deltoid were isolated and identified for later use. A
fiberglass pin was inserted through the humerus
perpendicular to the epicondyles to control the
humeral rotation during the motions. The humerus
was then transected just distal to the level of the
deltoid tuberosity. A point was chosen at the musculotendinous junction of each of the previously identified muscles. With 50-pound test Dacron fishing
line (Cabela's) a Bunnell stitch was placed in the
superficial aspect of the musculotendinous junction
at the point chosen for each muscle.
The muscle moment arms were measured with a
3Space tracker (Polhemus, Colchester, Vt.), a bank
of potentiometers (Bourns Model 35005 10K
Ohms, Bourns International, Riverside, Calif.), and
an IBM PC computer. With low-frequency magnetic field technology the 3Space tracker measures
the three-dimensional position and orientation of
the humeral head with respect to the glenoid with
an accuracy of 0.5 mm and 0.1 o according to the
manufacturer's specifications. 2
The bank of potentiometers was mounted on one
end of a plexiglass testing frame, while the specimen was bolted to the other (Figures 1 and 2). The
long Dacron stitch was passed through the hole in
the plexiglass backboard that best approximated
the orientation of the muscle fibers. The holes
selected were sprayed with a silicone lubricant to
minimize the effects of friction. Each stitch was then
wrapped around a potentiometer, and a 200 gm
weight was attached to the free end to prevent
slippage over the axle. Passive motion of the
shoulder caused the Dacron line to turn the potentiometer axle, thereby changing the output voltage.
The system was calibrated so that the tendon
excursion in millimeters could be calculated from
the potentiometer output. The data were collected
simultaneously from the 3Space tracker and the
potentiometers by a personal computer with specialized software.
Coordinate system. Three-dimensional finite
motion is sequence-dependent. Therefore motion
of the humerus with respect to the scapula was
defined according to the Eulerian angle system
based on the X-Z'-X" rotation sequence. With this
system the first rotation around the X-axis, ~h,
delineates the plane of elevation, the second rota-

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
Volume 6, Number 5

Kuechle et al.

431

Figure 1 Configuration of potentiometers used to measure muscle excursion during humeral
motion.

. ~

Posterimi
or,ddle,
~andanl
I Lat~isteri
s odel
r toid
II------Subscapul
aris
I
n
f
r
aspi
n
at
u
s
I~
--------~
Teres
Ik__.
_...---~iPueCt~rcalis
~

Supraspinatus

Teres minor
major

major

Figure 2 Diagrammaticrepresentationof experimentalsetup, with shoulder specimen mounted
on plexiglass testing frame and Dacron lines threaded through their corresponding holes. (By
permission of Mayo Foundation.)
tion, •, about the Z' axis determines the angle or
amount of elevation, and the third rotation, ~,
about the X" axis corresponds to humeral axial
rotation in the elevated position. The glenohumeral
neutral position was defined by positioning the
humeral shaft parallel to the vertebral border of the
scapula, with the proximal fiberglass pin perpendicular to the plane of the infraspinatus fossa on
the scapula (Figure 3).
At the completion of the experiment the shoulder

was disarticulated, and the 3Space tracker was
used as a spatial digitizer to define a reference
coordinate system and the geometric center of the
glenoid and the humeral head. 1 The reference
coordinate system was defined on the scapula by
digitizing the superior and inferior aspects of the
medial border of the scapula to define the X axis.
The Z axis was defined from the superior scapular
spine to the center of the glenoid. The Y axis was
defined as the perpendicular of the X and Z axes,

432

Kuechle et al.

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
September~October 1997

Figure 3 Mounted specimen in neutral position. Bank of potentiometersare in background,
separated from tracking device sensorsto avoid interferencewith magnetic signal.

~

~_.,,.,r
MAYO
©1~5

Figure 4 Global representationof shouldermotion demonstrating planes of motion studied. (By permission of
Mayo Foundation.)
and the resulting coordinate system was orthonormalized. Digitized points were taken at 2 to 3
mm intervals on the surface of the glenoid, the
scapula, and the humeral head.

The final moment arm data were described in a
thoracic coordinate system as shown in Figure 4.
This system was defined by rotating the scapular
coordinate system by set angles. For the elevation
motions the scapular coordinate system was rotated 30 ° posteriorly from the scapular plane such
that abduction occurred in the coronal plane and
was rotated 60 ° anteriorly such that flexion occurred in the sagittal plane. For horizontal flexion
the scapular coordinate system was abducted 30 °
in the scapular plane. In this system horizontal
flexion is a motion with the humerus in 90 ° elevation plane, starting from 90 ° (the humerus in the
coronal plane) and moving to 0 ° (the humerus in
the sagittal plane).
Tendon excursion. Each of the 10 muscles
studied was monitored by a potentiometer. With
the specimen mounted on the plexiglass frame and
the tensioned Dacron line wound around the potentiometer, any movement of the humerus caused
a rotational displacement of the potentiometer
shaft corresponding to the linear excursion of the
tendon. Data taken simultaneously by the 3Space
tracker allowed calculation of the three-dimensional position of the humerus with respect to the
glenoid and the axis and amount of rotation. The
slope of the joint angle versus tendon excursion
curve defined the instantaneous moment arm. Ag-

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
Volume 6, Number 5

Kuechle et al.

433

Figure 5 Mounted specimenat 90 ° elevation, with scapula inclined 30°. Humeral intramedullary rod restson guide usedto ensureuniform horizontal motion.

onistic muscles were assigned negative moment
arms, and antagonist muscles were assigned positive moment arms. In this experiment the scapula
was rigidly fixed; therefore the motions described
represent glenohumeral rather than humerothoracic motions.
Four glenohumeral movements were selected for
investigation. Imagining the range of glenohumeral motion as a globe, elevation in three longitudinal planes and horizontal motion in one latitudinal plane (Figure 4) were studied. The humerus
was elevated maximally from the neutral starting
position in each of three vertical planes: the coronal plane, the scapular plane, and the sagittal
plane. The motion of the humerus was monitored
by the 3Space tracker, and the elevation angle
was calculated. During elevation the scapula was
fixed vertically in 0 ° of inclination, and humeral
rotation was kept constant according to the convention previously used in this laboratory. 4
Throughout the remainder of this article "abduction" is used to refer to motion in the coronal plane,
"scaption" is motion in the scapular plane, and
"flexion" refers to motion in the sagittal plane.
The latitudinal plane selected corresponded
to a horizontal plane at 90 ° of elevation. The
scapula was inclined 30 °, and the glenohumeral

joint was elevated 60 o based on previous descriptions of the relative contributions of the scapuIothoracic and glenohumeral joints to shoulder
motion (Figure 5). 6' 7, 9, 13To correlate the humerus
position with in vivo measurements, the motions
were transformed from the scapularly based coordinate system to a thoracically based coordinate
system as described previously. Horizontal flexion
was defined as anterior motion along the horizontal plane, and horizontal extension was defined
as posterior motion. The movement studied consisted of horizontal flexion of the humerus in the
90 ° elevation plane, from maximal extension posterior to the coronal plane to maximal flexion
anteriorly toward the sagittal plane. During horizontal flexion the distal humeral rotation pin was
held vertical, perpendicular to the plane of motion.
The same investigator performed all of the glenohumeral motions in all specimens. To minimize
variation among specimens during data collection,
an acrylic guide with an adjustable base was used
to control motion along the specified planes. Data
were gathered at 30 Hz, and each range of
motion was measured over a 5-second period.
The glenohumeral orientation was subsequently
calculated from the kinematic data collected. The

434

Kuechle et al.

J. ShoulderElbow Surg.
September~October 1997

FLEXION

5.

............. r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4." ....... ".....
3

f . ~

~ - -

~

~

~

2':

- - . h . .

.--

MOMENT
ARM
(CM)

0.:'". - .

.

.

:"~:~

--

.....
' ~ '

-1-" "=~ ~

-3-0

.~

10

20

-": "~-'j~

k- .....

30

40

50

60

70

.....

SUBSCAPULARIS

. . . .

TERES MINOR

. . . .

INFRASPINATUS
SUPRASPINATUS

FLEXION ( D E G R E E S )

LATISSIMUS DORSI
ANTERIOR DELTOID
--

--

MIDDLE DELTOID

................. TERES MAJOR

Figure

. . . .

POSTERIOR DELTOID

- -- --

PECTORALIS MAJOR

6 Instantaneous shoulder muscle moment arm during elevation in sagittal plane (flexion).

(By permission of Mayo Foundation.)
finite screw axis rotation was calculated from the
initial position to each subsequent position. The
tendon excursion was interpolated as a function of
rotation with generalized cross-validation splines.
The instantaneous moment arm was determined
from the tendon excursion and humeral rotation
angle by calculating the derivative of the curve at
1o intervals.
The moment arms were normalized for specimen
size by multiplying each moment arm by a ratio of
the average humeral head radius of all specimens
to the humeral head radius of the given specimen.
Statistical tests were performed on the normalized
data. The means were calculated over a range of
motion such that a minimum of four specimens
were included at each interval. Where appropriate, the moment arm data was analyzed with a
one-way analysis of variance with repeated measures and the Newman/Keuls test for statistical
significance, which was defined as p < 0.05.
RESULTS
Elevation. Overall, during elevation the anterior deltoid, middle deltoid, and supraspinatus had
the largest agonist (elevator) moment arms (Figures
6, 7, and 8) (Table 1). Conversely, the teres major,
latissimus dorsi, and pectoralis major tendons

were found to have the largest antagonist or
depressor moment arms. The teres minor was a less
effective depressor. The remaining three muscles,
the infraspinatus, subscapularis, and posterior deltoid, had biphasic function, acting as either elevators or depressors depending on humeral position.
The infraspinatus tendon shortened during the first
30 ° to 50 ° of motion regardless of plane, implying
elevator function, and lengthened with elevation
above that height, suggesting depressor function.
In contrast, the subscapularis and posterior deltoid
acted as depressors initially and as elevators with
increasing elevation.
Changing the plane of humeral elevation from
the sagittal plane to the coronal plane caused
significant changes in the moment arms. The average elevator moment arm of the supraspinatus
(sagittal plane, -0.5 cm; coronal plane, - 1 . 5
cm), posterior deltoid (1.4 cm, -1.3 cm), middle
deltoid (-1.8 cm, -2.3 cm), subscapularis (0.4
cm, - 0 . 6 cm), and infraspinatus (0.1 cm, - 0 . 2
cm) increased. Similarly, as the humerus was positioned more posteriorly, the average depressor
moment arm of the pectoralis major also became
larger (1.0 cm, 4.6 cm). In contrast, the average
elevator moment arm of the anterior deltoid became smaller (-2.7 cm, - 1.7 cm). Changing the

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
Volume 6, Number 5

K u e c h l e et al.

435

SCAPTION

6
..,.,,.. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
3
2

MOMENT
ARM

1

-

.

° -

.

(CM)
0
-1

.....

SUBSCAPULARIS

-2

. . . .

TERES MINOR

. . . .

-3
10

20

30

40

50

60

70,

80

90

1O0

INFRASPINATUS
SUPRASPINATUS
LATISSIMUS DORSI

SCAPTION ( DEGREES )

ANTERIOR DELTOID
MIDDLE DELTOID
................. TERES MAJOR
. . . .

POSTERIOR DELTOID

- ~

PECTORALIS MAJOR

~

Figure 7 Instantaneous shoulder muscle moment arm during elevation in scapular plane
(scaption). (By permission of Mayo Foundation.)

ABDUCTION
6¸
5!°

,.~ ~ , ' m

4!

~'~

........... 1

......"*'"3 ¸:
f ~
MOMENT
ARM

f

2 i f
~.1 ¸:

(CM)

-o

°~.

.1:

-

2 ! ~ . ~_

_

.3i
0

-.

t ~"
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

. . . . .

SUBSCAPULARIS

. . . .

TERES MINOR

. . . .

INFRASPINATUS
SUPRASPINATUS

ABDUCTION ( D E G R E E S )
-

-

LATISSIMUS DORSI
ANTERIOR DELTOID
MIDDLE DELTOID

................. TERES MAJOR
. . . .

POSTERIOR DELTOID
PECTORALIS MAJOR

Figure 8 Instantaneous shoulder muscle moment arm during elevation in coronal plane (abduction). (By permission of Mayo Foundation.)
plane of elevation did not consistently influence the
magnitude of the average depressor moment arms
of the latissimus dorsi, teres major, and teres minor
aside from resulting in larger moment arms in the

scapular plane than in the other two planes. In
general, muscles with elevator or biphasic function
demonstrated larger elevator moment arms in the
posterior planes (except anterior deltoid, which

436

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
September~October 1997

Kuechle et al.

Table I Average moment arm and standard

deviation for shoulder muscles during four motions
Horizontal
flexion
Abduction Scaption
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
SC
(SD)
TMi
(SD)
IS
(SD)
SP
(SD)
LD
(SO)
AD
(SD)
MD
(SD)
TMa
(SD)
PD
(SD)
PM
(SD)

-0.30
0.43
1.37
0.52
1.86
0.45
1.44
0.42
0.34
0.30
-1.68
0.78
0.57
0.85
0.36
0.39
2.46
0.71
-4.05
0.56

-0.56
0.79
0.71
0.41
-0.23
0.55
- 1.54
0.73
3.67
0.57
-1.65
0.74
-2.34
0.66
4.65
0.68
- 1.31
1.18
4.65
0.90

-0.64
0.62
0.94
0.42
-0.10
0.60
- 1.02
0.64
3.97
0.56
-2.10
0.74
-2.35
0.62
4.83
0.76
-0.17
1.30
3.29
1.29

Flexion
(cm)
0.39
0.37
0.82
0.29
0.10
0.46
-0.54
0.31
3.65
0.51
-2.69
0.79
-1.80
0.66
4.60
0.74
1.38
1.24
1.01
0.47

SC, Subscapularis; TMi, teres minor; IS, infraspinatus; SP,
supraspinatus; LD, latissimusdorsi; AD, anterior deltoid; MD,
middle deltoid; TMa, teres major; PD, posterior deltoid; PM,
pectoralis major.

had a larger elevator arm anteriorly). The depressors aside from the pectoralis major were more
efficient in the scapular plane.
Progressive elevation in the scapular plane
(scaption) resulted in significant differences in the
moment arms of all muscles except the posterior
deltoid. The middle deltoid (p < 0.03), anterior
deltoid (p < 0.01 ), and subscapularis (p < 0.004)
became significantly more efficient elevators when
compared at 25 ° and 75 ° of scaption. The posterior deltoid also demonstrated a larger elevator
moment arm with increasing elevation. The supraspinatus elevation moment arm decreased (p
0.0002), whereas the latissimus dorsi (p < 0.01 ),
teres major (p < 0.0001), and pectoralis major
(p < 0.0002) all became significantly less efficient
depressors. Conversely, the depressor moment
arm of the teres minor (p < 0.0001) and infraspinatus (p < 0.007) became significantly larger with
increasing scaption. The effect of progressive elevation on moment arm in the other planes was not
statistically significant; however, the same trends
were observed.
In general, the most efficient elevators were the

anterior deltoid (anteriorly), the middle deltoid
(posteriorly), and the supraspinatus (initially). The
most effective depressors were the teres major
(anteriorly) and the pectoralis major (posteriorly)
followed by the latissimus dorsi and the teres
minor. The remaining muscles (posterior deltoid,
infraspinatus, subscapularis) had biphasic function, acting as elevators or depressors depending
on humeral position.
Horizontal flexion. During horizontal flexion along the 90 ° elevation plane the pectoralis
major had the largest moment arm (mean - 4 . 0
cm) followed by the anterior deltoid (-1.7 cm)
and the subscapularis (-0.3 cm) (Figure 9). The
muscle with the greatest horizontal extension moment arm was the posterior deltoid (mean 2.5 cm)
followed by the infraspinatus (1.9 cm), supraspinatus (1.4 cm), teres minor (1.4 cm), middle deltoid (0.6 cm), teres major (0.4 cm), and latissimus
dorsi (0.3 cm).
Overall, as the humerus was horizontally flexed
from a position of maximal horizontal extension,
those muscles with mean horizontal flexion or
horizontal extension moment arms greater than 1
cm showed a decreasing moment arm. In contrast,
those muscles with smaller moment arms (teres
major, middle deltoid, and latissimus dorsi) exhibited an increasing moment arm. The subscapularis'
moment arm was not significantly influenced by
humeral position.
DISCUSSION

The literature regarding muscle moment arm
varies significantly with respect to techniques used
to collect data, motions studied, number of specimens dissected, and methods used to calculate the
specific moment arm values. 3, s, 8, lo-12 Nevertheless, a comparison of results reveals many similarities. Scaption is the motion most often studied. All
authors agree that the supraspinatus and components of the deltoid have the largest elevator
moment arms. The role of the remaining shoulder
muscles remains inconsistently reported and somewhat controversial. Jiang et al. 1° and Otis et al., 12
using different methods of data collection, found
the supraspinatus to have the largest elevator
moment arm, followed by the middle deltoid.
Those authors also stated that the upper infraspinatus and upper subscapularis have significant
elevator function. Jn addition, Otis et al. 12 reported
the anterior deltoid to have elevator function (although it acts as a depressor during the initial arc

Kuechle et al.

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
Volume 6, Number 5

437

H O R I Z O N T A L FLEXION
4'

3':
2:
MOMENT
ARM

(CM)

~"" : - " : " "

-

I "'-

1,:

0:,

"~ ....

' .....

I. . . .

_.:.-.:.
"1 . . . .

1 ....

",1- . . . .

/

~

-1F
-2:

/ _

~

"
~....

-.3.:

. . . . .

SUBSCAPULARIS

. . . .

TERES M I N O R

. . . .

-50

20

40

60

80

100

H O R I Z O N T A L FLEXION ( D E G R E E S )

120

140

INFRASPINATUS
SUPRASPINATUS

-

-

LATISSIMUS DORSI
ANTERIOR DELTOID
MIDDLE D E L T O I D

.................

TERES MAJOR

. . . .

POSTERIOR DELTOID

. ~

m

PECTORALIS MAJOR

F i g u r e 9 Instantaneous shoulder muscle moment arm during horizontal flexion with humerus
elevated 90 ° (By permission of Mayo Foundation.)

of motion), whereas the posterior deltoid had the
largest depressor moment arm. Howell et al., 8
along with Poppen and Walker, is found the deltoid to be the most efficient elevator, followed
closely by the supraspinatus. Poppen and Walker is reported the posterior deltoid, subscapularis,
and infraspinatus to have lesser elevation function,
whereas Howell et al. considered the momentproducing effects of these muscles to be negligible.
In this study we found the middle and anterior
deltoid to have the largest average elevator moment arm, each more than nice the magnitude of
supraspinatus (Table 1). Comparison of moment
arm values at 25 °, 50 °, and 75 ° of scaption
allowed identification of significant differences
among muscles. At 25 ° of scaption the middle
deltoid had the largest elevator moment arm but
was not significantly greater than the supraspinatus (p < 0.27) or anterior deltoid (p < 0.35).
However, all three muscles had significantly larger
moment arms than the infraspinatus (p < 0.007)
and subscapularis (p < 0.001 ). At 50 ° the middle
and anterior deltoid again demonstrated the largest elevator moment arms, and, although not significantly different from each other, were significantly larger than the supraspinatus (p < 0.001),
subscapularis (p < 0.001), and posterior deltoid
(p < 0.001). The infraspinatus acted as a weak

depressor at this elevation. At 75 ° the trends were
similar, with the middle deltoid and anterior deltoid again having significantly greater elevator
moment arm than the subscapularis (p < 0.001),
posterior deltoid (p < 0.001), and supraspinatus
(p < 0.001). The infraspinatus was again a depressor. These data imply that the supraspinatus
is more important as an elevator early in the
motion, with the moment arm decreasing with
increasing elevation. The infraspinatus also demonstrated weak elevator function at 25 ° but became a depressor above that height. In addition,
the subscapularis and posterior deltoid had weak
elevator function, but their moment arms became
larger than that of the supraspinatus be~een 50 °
and 75 ° of scaption. The teres major, latissimus
dorsi, and pectoralis major were the most significant depressors at each degree of elevation analyzed.
The principal difference between our findings
and those in the literature concerns the role of the
supraspinatus. Previous authors have concluded
that the supraspinatus has nearly the same or even
a greater role than the deltoid in scapular elevation
based on relative moment arm size. In this study
the supraspinatus, anterior deltoid, and middle
deltoid had nearly equal moment arms near the
beginning of the motion. However, as the humerus

438

Kuechle et al.

was elevated, the supraspinatus moment arm decreased to nearly zero. The deltoid moment arms,
on the other hand, increased throughout the elevation motion. The difference in our experimental
design may explain this departure from previous
findings. Considering the anatomic relationship of
the deltoid to the supraspinatus, namely that the
deltoid lies superficial and therefore farther from
the glenohumeral joint center of rotation, it is
intuitively reasonable that the deltoid has a larger
moment arm than the supraspinatus.
Elevation in the coronal plane (abduction) has
been studied less frequently than scaption but with
similar trends. DeLuca and ForresP concluded that
the supraspinatus and middle deltoid were the
primary elevators in this plane and that the remaining rotator cuff muscles acted as glenohumeral
stabilizers. Bassett et al. s extrapolated elevator
and depressor moment arms from a position of 90 °
of abduction and 90 ° of external rotation and
found the anterior deltoid to be the most important
elevator, whereas the latissimus dorsi, pectoralis
major, posterior deltoid, teres minor, infraspinatus,
and teres major all acted essentially as depressors.
In this study we calculated the middle deltoid to
have the largest elevator moment arm followed by
the anterior deltoid, supraspinatus, and posterior
deltoid. The teres major, pectoralis major, and
latissimus dorsi were the most efficient depressors.
The supraspinatus became more effective as an
elevator in this plane relative to the scapular plane
most likely because of change in the three-dimensional glenohumeral joint configuration.
Bassett et al. s and Jiang et al. 1° reported on
horizontal flexion. Bassett et al. extrapolated that
the most efficient horizontal flexors were the pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, subscapularis, latissimus dorsi, biceps, and coracobrachialis. The
supraspinatus, posterior deltoid, infraspinatus, and
teres minor were found to have the largest horizontal extension moment arms. Jiang et al. reported on
forward motion from the coronal plane to a plane
30 ° anterior to that of the scapula. The amount of
elevation was not described. The major horizontal
flexor was the anterior deltoid, and the most
effective horizontal extensor was the posterior deltoid. In this study we found the pectoralis major to
be more than twice as efficient as the anterior
deltoid in horizontally flexing the humerus along
the 90 ° elevation plane. The posterior deltoid,
infraspinatus, supraspinatus, and teres minor were
the primary horizontal extensors. Again, differ-

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
September~October 1997

ences in experimental designs and a paucity of
descriptive data make direct comparison with our
results difficult. To our knowledge no author has
studied muscle moment arm during elevation in the
sagittal plane.
A potential criticism of this study lies in our
attempt to represent the centroid of muscles with
broad origins such as the subscapularis as a single
line of force. This assumes the actual line of force
bisects the origin of the muscle and further that the
muscle contracts uniformly. Neither assumption is
likely to be entirely true; however, modeling multiple fibers for each muscle would make this study
overly complex. A line directed parallel to a muscle's fibers bisecting its origin seems most likely to
represent the resultant of the force vector generated by the muscle. In future studies possibly more
lines can be affixed to each muscle and the
different components measured and compared.
This study measured moment arms at the glenohumeral joint with the scapula fixed in the vertical
or 30 ° abducted position. Although fixing the
scapula simplified the measurement process, it
limited the moment arm data to specific orientations of the scapula. Fixing the scapula most likely
had the largest effect for the elevation motions,
where the location of the glenoid and humeral
head with respect to some muscle origins may
change over the course of the motion. For the
horizontal flexion motion the scapular movement
should be smaller, and the measurement should
more nearly approximate the in vivo situation.
The moment arm provides only one component
of a muscle's ability to generate torque. Other
pertinent factors include physiologic cross-sectional area, length tension relationships, and level
of neural activity. The clinical situation, in which a
subject actively performs a given motion, is even
more complex. Shoulder motion is a function not
only of the applied torque but also of the coordination of muscle forces. Only in a dynamic setting,
where the muscles can be studied actively in
concert with one another, can their roles comprehensively be defined.
Conclusion, In this study the moment arms of
10 muscles around the glenohumeral joint were
measured for humeral elevation and horizontal
flexion. The supraspinatus, anterior deltoid, and
middle deltoid have the largest elevation moment
arms, whereas the teres major, latissimus dorsi,
and pectoralis major have the largest depression
moment arms. The elevation moment arms were

J. Shoulder Elbow Surg.
Volume 6, Number 5

larger, making the muscles more efficient, in the
coronal plane than in the scapular or sagittal
planes. The depression moment arms were largest
in the plane of the scapula.
In horizontal flexion the pectoralis major showed
a much larger moment arm than any of the other
muscles. The posterior deltoid had the largest
horizontal extension moment arm. Both the horizontal extensors and flexors had larger moment
arms when the humerus was in the coronal plane
than in the saggital plane.
The muscle moment arm is important because it
determines the extent to which force generated by
a muscle will be translated into a torque causing
joint motion. This study provides a basis for determining to what extent force generated by a muscle
is converted to humeral motion, thereby allowing
the functions of shoulder motion and stabilization
to be surmised from neural activity data collected
by electromyography. It can also be used to develop more comprehensive models of shoulder
motion, which may be useful in rehabilitation
planning or ergonomic studies.
REFERENCES
1. An KN, Jacobsen MC, Berglund LJ,Chao EYS. Application of
a magnetic tracking device to kinesiologic studies. J Biomech
1988;21:613-20.
2. An KN, Takahashi K, Harrigan TP, Chao EYS. Determination
of muscle orientation and moment arms. J Biomech Eng
1984;106:280-2.

Kuechle et al.

439

3. BassettRW, Browne AO, Morrey BF, An KN. Glenohumeral
muscle force and moment mechanics in a position of shoulder
instability. J Biomech 1990;23:405-15.
4. Browne AO, Hoffmeyer P, Tanaka S, An KN, Morrey BF.
Glenohumeral elevation studied in three dimensions. J Bone
Joint Surg Br 1990;72B:843-5.
5. DeLuca CJ, Forrest WJ. Force analysis of individual muscles
acting simultaneously on the shoulder joint during isometric
abduction. J Biomech 1973;6:385-93.
6. Freedman L, Munro RH. Abduction of the arm in the scapular
plane: scapular and glenohumeral movements. J Bone Joint
Surg Am 1966;18A:1503-10.
7. Howell SM, Galinat BJ, Renzi AJ, Marone PJ. Normal and
abnormal mechanics of the glenohumeral joint in the horizontal plane. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1988;7OA:227-32.
8. Howell SM, Imobersteg AM, Seger DH, Marone PJ. Clarification of the role of the supraspinatus muscle in shoulder
function. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68A:398404.
9. Inman VT, Saunders JR, Abbott LC. Observations on the
function of the shoulder joint. J Bone Joint Surg 1944;26:130.
10. Jiang CC, Otis JC, Warren RF, Wickiewicz TL Muscle
excursion measurements and moment arm determinations of
rotator cuff muscles. Trans ORS 1988;13:441.
11. Kuechle DK, Newman SR, Itoi E, Neibur GL, Morrey BF, An
KN. Shoulder muscle moment arm during humeral rotation in
four positions. Unpublished data.
12. OtisJC, Jiang CC, Wickiewicz TL, PetersonMG, Warren RF,
Santner TJ. Changes in the moment arms of the rotator cuff and
deltoid muscle with abduction and rotation. J BoneJoint Surg
1994;76-A:667-76.
13. Poppen NK, Walker TS. Forces at the glenohumeral joint in
abduction. Clin Orthop 1978;135:165.

