Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 2005, 19(4), 931–938
q 2005 National Strength & Conditioning Association

THE IMPACT OF FOOT POSITION ON
ELECTROMYOGRAPHICAL ACTIVITY OF THE
SUPERFICIAL QUADRICEPS MUSCLES DURING
LEG EXTENSION
MARK STOUTENBERG,1 ALESSANDRA P. PLUCHINO,1,4 FANGCHAO MA,3,4 JENNIFER E. HOCTOR,1
AND JOSEPH F. SIGNORILE1,2,3
Department of Exercise and Sport Sciences, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida 33124; 2Stein
Gerontological Institute, Miami, Florida 33137; 3Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Miami, Florida 33125; 4SUM Learning Center, UHZ Sports Medicine Institute, Coral
Gables, Florida 33124; 5Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136.
1

ABSTRACT. Stoutenberg, M., A. P. Pluchino, F. Ma, J. E. Hoctor,
and J.F. Signorile. The impact of foot position on electromyographical activity of the superficial quadriceps muscles during
leg extension. J. Strength Cond. Res. 19(4)931–938. 2005.—This
study investigated variations in electromyographic (EMG) responses of the vastus lateralis (VL), rectus femoris (RF), and
vastus medialis (VM) due to foot position during leg extension.
Twenty-four men and women (23.67 6 4.02 years) performed 8
repetitions at 70% of 8 repetition maximum with their leg medially rotated, laterally rotated, and neutral. Repeated-measures analyses of variance indicated that the highest normalized
root mean square (NrmsEMG) for the VM and VL occurred with
medial rotation, and the highest NrmsEMG for the RF occurred
with lateral rotation. Significant NrmsEMG increases and median power frequency decreases occurred across repetitions regardless of foot position. Therefore, medial rotation produced the
greatest muscle activation for the VL and VM, whereas lateral
rotation produced the greatest activation in the RF. These findings are applicable to athletes or bodybuilders who are seeking
to selectively increase either the size or performance of a specific
muscle of the quadriceps group.
KEY WORDS. vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, rectus femoris,
constant load resistance exercise, muscle utilization pattern, fatigue

INTRODUCTION
ifters have long believed that changes in limb
positions or joint angles during the performance of a particular exercise can maximize
the effects of that exercise on specific muscles.
Among the most common muscles targeted are
those of the quadriceps group as lifters attempt to increase the peak or outward sweep of the vastus lateralis
(VL) or the teardrop appearance of the vastus medialis
(VM). Additionally, specific quadriceps muscles may be
targeted because of their importance in a particular sport.
For example, the rectus femoris (RF) is an important hip
flexor used during cycling (5), whereas both the VL and
the VM are important power producers during speed
skating (13).
One of the most common dynamic, constant-resistance
exercises used to target the quadriceps is the bilateral leg
extension using either weight-stack or plate-loaded machines. It is commonly believed that changing the foot

L

position during this open-chain leg exercise allows the
lifter to emphasize the use of one quadriceps muscle over
the others. Proponents of adjusting the foot position during leg extensions believe that externally rotating the legs
will place a greater emphasis on the VL, whereas internally rotating the legs will target the VM (21, 22).
The ability to selectively target specific quadriceps
muscles by changing foot position would prove useful under a number of training scenarios. In bodybuilding, symmetry among the quadriceps muscles is critical. Targeting
specific muscles is also important in rehabilitation and
injury prevention, in which muscle imbalances can result
in a lateral tracking of the patella as the knee joint moves
through its full range of motion (ROM) and result in patellofemoral tendinitis (6, 10, 26). Therefore, both rehabilitation and injury prevention programs often concentrate on correcting this muscle imbalance.
Studies have examined the relationships between different foot angles during leg extension using electromyography. These studies, however, have used either isokinetic (7, 8, 12) or isometric testing methods (24, 25, 27)
to examine the question. Although isokinetic and isometric training techniques may still be found in a rehabilitative setting, they are seldom used in the weight room,
fitness club, or wellness center setting. To our knowledge,
only a single electromyographic (EMG) study by Signorile
et al. (22) has examined the effect of foot position on quadriceps muscle utilization patterns during dynamic constant resistance exercise. Although their data were recorded throughout the entire ROM of an isotonic leg extension, the study reported the results of only a single
repetition at each foot angle. This leaves unanswered the
potential impact that fatigue might have on quadriceps
muscle utilization patterns during a typical multirepetition set.
The results of these studies indicate that regardless
of the type of muscular contraction, activation of the
quadriceps musculature during leg extension is affected
by foot position. It was the purpose of this study to quantify the levels of EMG activity of the 3 superficial quadriceps muscles at different foot positions to determine
whether changes in foot position would affect muscle uti931

932

STOUTENBERG, PLUCHINO, MA ET AL.

TABLE 1. Physical characteristics of subjects.
Mean 6 SD

No.

Height (cm)

Weight (kg)

Age (y)

Female
Male
Sample

12
12
24

164.68 6 8.99
183.52 6 5.11
174.10 6 11.98

60.18 6 7.25
84.86 6 9.64
72.52 6 15.11

22.58 6 2.15
24.75 6 5.15
23.67 6 4.02

lization patterns during a typical multirepetition, constant-resistance training set performed through the full
ROM of the lifter.

METHODS
Experimental Approach to the Problem

To ascertain the specific activities of the VL, RF, and VM
muscles at varying foot angles during 8-repetition sets of
the leg extension, separate repeated-measures analyses
of variance (ANOVAs) were performed on the amplitude
and frequency characteristics of their EMG signals. When
significant differences were found among foot positions or
across repetitions, least square means comparisons with
Bonferroni adjustments were used to detect the source of
the differences. The foot angle that produced the greatest
amplitude and frequency responses for each separate
quadriceps muscle was considered the most effective foot
angle for targeting that muscle.

FIGURE 1. Schematic diagram of electromyocardiograph signal (EMG) collection system.

Subjects

Twelve men and 12 women (aged 18–33) who were currently performing resistance training at least twice per
week using standard lifting protocols (2–3 sets of 8–12
repetitions) and had a minimum of 6 months of lifting
experience, participated in the study. Physical characteristics of the subjects who met these criteria and participated in the study are presented in Table 1. Before admission into the study, all potential subjects completed a
medical questionnaire form designed to screen for previous or pre-existing injuries. To qualify for the study, applicants needed to be in good health, with no knee problems such as tendinitis, instability, or previous surgical
repairs that could have affected their performance or
place them at undue risk for injury. The University of
Miami’s Medical Science Subcommittee for the Protection
of Human Subjects approved all procedures before testing
and subjects were required to sign an informed consent
before participating.
Lifting Protocols

Each subject performed bilateral knee extensions at 70%
of their 8 repetition maximum (8RM) resistance on a Cybex VR Leg Extension machine (CYBEX International,
Inc., Medway, MA) with the backrest secured at a 1008
angle. The bilateral leg extension was chosen over the
single leg movement because it provided a more comfortable condition for varying foot positions and for maintaining the feet at the chosen foot angle once they were positioned. The bilateral leg extension is also a more common exercise variation than the unilateral form.
The ROM for the leg extension movement was individually established for each subject. Two magnetic closure switches (reed switches), interfaced with a 5-V power
source, were placed on the frame of the leg extension machine at each end of the subject’s ROM. A magnet was
attached to the top of the weight stack. When the magnet
passed a reed switch, a 5-V spike was produced and sent

to the analog-to-digital board of the EMG collection system. These spikes were used to mark the beginning and
ending of the concentric portion of the lift (Figure 1). Each
subject was asked to maximally extend his or her legs,
and a second reed switch was placed on the machine
frame at this position to mark the upper end of the subject’s ROM. This reed switch was interfaced with a second
5-V power source and buzzer so that an audible signal
was produced. This signal served as an indicator to the
subject that he or she had reached the end of the concentric ROM. In addition, the spike was used to mark the
end ROM by the EMG collection program. The spikes collected at the beginning and end of each concentric contraction allowed us to accurately mark the event for EMG
analysis.
Subject testing and data collection occurred during a
single laboratory session. This ensured that the EMG
data collected were not affected by electrode placement or
preparation. All lifts were preceded by a movement-specific warm-up on the Cybex machine consisting of 5 repetitions at 50% of the subject’s reported 8RM. After the
specific warm-up sets, each subject performed 1 or 2 additional sets to establish an 8RM figure. Because subjects
were regular weight-trainers, they were able to report
their expected 8RM, allowing us to establish the actual
figure on the machine within 2 testing sets. Subjects were
given a 5-minute rest period between all maximum lift
attempts. Subjects received a minimum of 10 minutes of
additional recovery before the start of testing. During this
time the subject was prepared for EMG data collection
(see Electromyography section below).
Three foot positions were tested: (a) toes neutral
(NEU), with no medial or lateral rotation; (b) toes in (TI),
with toes internally or medial-rotated as far as could be
comfortably maintained by the subject throughout all repetitions; and (c) toes out (TO), with toes externally or laterally rotated as far as the subject could comfortably

EMG AND FOOT POSITION 933

maintain throughout the repetitions. No attempt was
made to dictate a specific foot angle for the TI or TO positions because this would, in practice, be dependent on
each individual’s ROM and their ability to maintain that
position during the performance of the leg extension. The
order of the foot positions was randomly selected to reduce the impact of any order effect. One set of 8 repetitions was performed for each foot position. A repetition
did not count unless a full ROM was performed. The full
ROM during each repetition began with a momentary
resting of the weight plates and ended when the magnet
affixed to the weight stack passed the reed switch eliciting an audible signal. Subjects were instructed not to reverse the direction of movement at the top of the ROM
until the audible signal was heard and to provide a momentary stop at the bottom of the ROM. Subjects were
given a minimum of 5 minutes rest between sets. Consistent instructions were used to motivate the subjects during testing. Data were collected throughout the entire
ROM and later divided into concentric and eccentric portions for analysis.
Electromyography

Because the purpose of the study was to examine the level
of EMG activity in the 3 large superficial quadriceps muscles (VL, RF, and VM), a bipolar surface configuration
was chosen to maximize the reception area while controlling the potential for cross-talk among the muscles examined. Basmajian and DeLuca (3) specifically recommend surface electrodes for this application. Concerning
cross-talk, Andreassen and Rosenfalck (2) have reported
that a bipolar configuration set parallel to the active fibers of the muscle is the most selective surface configuration. In addition, Lynn et al. (14) estimated that the
area of detection using a bipolar surface configuration
was equal to the interelectrode distance. Because the
girth of the muscles examined in this study was considerably greater than the 1.5-cm interelectrode distance
used, the likelihood of cross-talk was minimal.
The exact location of each motor point was determined
using a low-voltage stimulator delivering a series of 5millisecond pulses at a rate of 5 pulses per second. Voltage was progressively reduced from approximately 50 V
until only one point elicited a response. This point was
then used as the motor point for that muscle. After motor
points were located, the skin surface distal to each site
was shaved; rubbed with a disposable, light abrasive paper; and cleaned with alcohol to remove dead surface tissues and oils that might reduce the fidelity of the signal.
Disposable Ag/AgCl pregelled disk surface electrode pairs
(Marquette Medical Systems, Jupiter, FL) were positioned immediately distal to each motor point, 1.5 cm
apart and parallel with the underlying muscle fibers, as
determined by the penation of the muscle. EMG data during all knee extension repetitions were collected from the
quadriceps muscles of each subject’s right leg, and a reference electrode was placed on the head of the fibula of
the same leg.
Because raw EMG signals were recorded using a wireless EMG telemetry system (Noraxon USA, Inc., Scottsdale, AZ), the quality of the signals was visibly assessed
for each muscle before data collection. The Noraxon system used to collect the EMG data had an input impedance
of 2 MV and a common mode rejection ratio of 100 dB.
The gain was set at 2,000 with band-pass filtering set

between 1 and 500 Hz. Signals were sampled at a speed
of 1,024 Hz, digitized using a 16-bit A/D converter
(DataPac, Laguna Beach, CA), and stored on a personal
computer.
To confirm the reliability of our EMG data collection
system, interclass correlation coefficients were computed
between 2 maximal isokinetic contractions at 1.57 rad·s21
(908·s21) performed by 24 subjects (12 men, 12 women;
mean age 6 SD 5 23.7 6 4.0 years). The analyses yielded
values of 0.94 for the VM, 0.93 for the RF, and 0.98 for
the VL. Comparisons were made using isokinetic contractions to reduce the potential impact of differences in
velocity between the 2 contractions, and 2 contractions
were used to reduce the impact of fatigue on the analysis.
EMG Analysis Procedures

Recorded EMG signals from each muscle were analyzed
using DATAPAC 2K2 software (Run Technologies, Mission Viejo, CA). The root mean square of the EMG signal
(rmsEMG) was used as a measure of average muscle activity for each muscle during the concentric phase of each
repetition under each testing condition, and the median
power frequency (MdPF) was used to assess shifts in the
EMG frequency spectrum. Increases in rmsEMG and concomitant reductions in MdPF are commonly used as an
indicator of muscle fatigue. The rmsEMG signal was normalized (NrmsEMG) using the highest recorded value observed for each individual muscle during any of the 3 testing conditions.
Statistical Analyses

Data analyses included separate 3 (condition) 3 8 (repetition) repeated-measures ANOVAs to examine differences among conditions and repetitions for each of the 2 dependent variables for each muscle (NrmsEMG, DMdPF).
When statistically significant interactions were detected,
post hoc Bonferroni tests were used to compare individual
least square means (LS means) to ascertain the source of
those differences. Statistical significance was set at p #
0.05. All analyses were performed using the SAS 8.0 statistical package (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).

RESULTS
The repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant differences by condition for the NrmsEMG during knee extension for the VL (p , 0.0001), RF (p , 0.0001), and VM
(p , 0.0018). There were also significant differences in
NrmsEMG and MdPF across repetitions for all muscles
tested (p , 0.0001). No significant condition 3 repetition
interactions were found for either variable for any of the
muscles tested.
Figure 2 presents the mean and standard deviation
for each condition for all muscles tested. Multiple comparisons of LS means with Bonferroni adjustment for the
VL revealed that the NrmsEMG was significantly greater
for the TI condition than for either the NEU (p , 0.0013)
or the TO (p , 0.0001) conditions. Additionally, the
NrmsEMG of VL was significantly greater for the NEU
condition than for the TO condition (p , 0.0330). The LS
means analysis for the RF revealed that the NrmsEMG
was significantly greater for the TO condition than for
either the TI or NEU conditions (p , 0.0001). For the VM,
the NrmsEMG was significantly greater for the TI condition than for NEU condition (p , 0.0012).
Figure 3a illustrates the pattern of change for the

934

STOUTENBERG, PLUCHINO, MA ET AL.

FIGURE 2. Normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal of the vastus medialis, rectus femoris, and
vastus lateralis during the concentric phase of leg extension at
foot angles toes out, neutral (NEU), and toes in. *Significantly
different than NEU. **Significantly different than all other
conditions. †Significantly different than TO.

NrmsEMG of the VL across repetitions. As can be seen
by the figure, the NrmsEMG of repetition 1 was significantly lower than that of repetitions 2–8. Repetition 2
produced significantly lower NrmsEMG values than repetitions 4–8, and values for repetition 3 were significantly
lower than those for repetitions 5–8. Values for repetitions 4 and 5 were significantly lower than those for repetitions 6–8, whereas the repetition 6 value was significantly lower than only repetition 8. Figure 3b illustrates
the pattern of change for the MdPF of the VL across repetitions. The only significant differences in MdPF detected were between repetitions 3 and 8, and repetitions 4
and 8.
Figure 4a illustrates the pattern of change for the
NrmsEMGs of the RF across repetitions. As can be seen
from the figure, the NrmsEMG of repetition 1 was significantly lower than that for repetitions 2–8. The repetition 2 value was significantly lower than those for repetitions 4–8; values for repetitions 3 and 4 were significantly lower than those of repetitions 5–8, and EMG activity levels for repetitions 5 and 6 were significantly less
than those for repetition 8. Figure 4b illustrates the pattern of change for the MdPF of the RF across repetitions.
As can be seen from the figure, the MdPF of repetition 1
was significantly greater than that of repetitions 4–8.
MdPF values for repetitions 2 through 5 were significantly greater than those for repetitions 6–8, and values
for repetition 6 were significantly greater than those for
repetition 8.
Figure 5a illustrates the pattern of change for the
NrmsEMGs of the VM across repetitions. As can be seen
from the figure, the NrmsEMG of repetition 1 was significantly lower than that of repetitions 2–8. Repetition 2
NrmsEMG was significantly lower than that of repetitions 4–8, and repetition 3 was significantly lower than
that of repetitions 5–8. Repetition 4 produced significantly less activity than repetitions 6–8, repetition 5 produced
less activity than repetitions 7–8, and repetition 6 produced significantly less activity than repetition 8. Figure
5b illustrates the pattern of change for the MdPF of the
VM across repetitions. As can be seen from the figure, the

FIGURE 3. (a) Normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) and (b) median power frequency
(MdPF) across repetitions during the concentric phase of the
knee extension for the vastus lateralis. All repetitions bracketed with the same letter are not significantly different. *Repetitions are significantly different than repetition 8.

MdPF values computed for repetitions 2 through 4 were
all significantly different than the value for repetition 8.

DISCUSSION
Our results clearly demonstrate that changes in foot angle during the performance of the leg extension exercise
under multiset, constant-loading conditions allow the targeting of different muscles of the quadriceps group. This
finding conflicts with those of previous researchers (11,
19, 25) who reported that levels of electrical activity were
not significantly affected by foot angles during isometric
knee extensions. Our results are supported, in part, by
both structural and functional data regarding the quadriceps. For example, it has been demonstrated that during the same movement, activity patterns may not be
equally shared among the quadriceps because of their
unique structures and functions (4, 5, 13, 16, 20–22). Biomechanical analyses have also shown that the VL, RF,
and VM produce their greatest levels of force production

EMG AND FOOT POSITION 935

FIGURE 4. (a) Normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) and (b) median power frequency
(MdPF) across repetitions during the concentric phase of the
knee extension for the rectum femoris. All repetitions bracketed with the same letter are not significantly different.

and electrical activity at different knee and hip angles (1,
15, 28). Furthermore, it has been shown that although
VL activity increases linearly with force development,
this is not true for the VM and RF (1).
For the VL, the greatest level of muscle activation
during the leg extension exercise occurred when the foot
was internally rotated. Because the fibers of the VL run
obliquely downward from the lateral to the medial side,
these results may have been due to increased tension as
the VL was stretched by medial rotation at the hip. Our
data agree in part with those of Signorile et al. (21) who
reported that the internally rotated and neutral foot positions produced greater levels of electrical activity than
the externally rotated condition during an isometric contraction with the knee held at 3.05 rad. However, our results are not in agreement with their findings at knee
angles of 1.57 and 2.62 rad in which the neutral position
produced higher rmsEMG values than the internally and
externally rotated positions, respectively. However, because that study employed isometric rather than dynamic

FIGURE 5. (a) Normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) and (b) median power frequency
(MdPF) across repetitions during the concentric phase of the
knee extension for the vastus medialis. All repetitions bracketed with the same letter are not significantly different. *Repetitions are significantly different than repetition 8.

muscle contractions, factors such as momentum and variations in activity through changing knee angles, may explain the divergent results. Additionally, fatigue may
have been a factor as evidenced by the changes in both
rmsEMG and MdPF observed across our multiple-repetition test set. Our findings for the VL also conflict with
a later study by Signorile et al. (22) who reported no significant difference in electrical activity for the VL due to
foot position throughout the full ROM of a single repetition of the leg extension. Because their findings were
based on a single repetition, as noted for the earlier
study, the differences between the 2 studies may have
been due to the effect of fatigue on the muscle utilization
pattern of the VL. Our results do agree with the findings
of Wheatley and Jahnke (27) who reported that the greatest level of activation of the VL was during medial rotation of the tibia when the knee was held at 1.57 rad and
the isometric contraction was performed with the subject
in a seated position.

936

STOUTENBERG, PLUCHINO, MA ET AL.

In contrast to the results produced by the VL, the
greatest level of muscle activation observed for the RF
occurred when the feet were held in an externally rotated
position. With a distinctly different point of origin and a
biarticular structure, the RF shows levels of muscle activation uniquely independent to those of both the VL and
the VM. This may explain why the vasti showed greater
electrical activity during internal rotation and the RF
showed a greater response during external rotation. The
origin of the RF is on the anterior inferior spine of the
ilium, slightly medial of the insertion; therefore, an external rotation of the femur may increase tension on the
RF and therefore increase the level of activation.
Our findings for the RF are not in agreement with
those of Signorile et al. (21) who reported that this muscle
produced greater electrical activity with the foot in a neutral position when the knee was held at an angle of 2.62
rad. Those researchers also reported no significant difference among foot positions at knee angles of 1.57 or 3.05
rad, but note that those data were collected during isometric contractions at set knee angles rather than during
dynamic exercise. Our results are in agreement with
those reported by Signorile et al. (22) during dynamic constant resistance testing. Those researchers observed that
both the lateral and medial heads of the RF showed their
highest levels of electrical activity when the foot was externally rotated.
For the VM, the electrical activity in the TI position
was greater than that produced in the neutral position.
Therefore, optimal targeting of both the vasti muscles
would occur during internal rotation of the lower limb.
An explanation for the higher levels of activity during
internal rotation may be the role the VM plays as a medial rotator of the femur during knee extension (9).
The current data for the VM agrees, in part, with the
results reported in the isometric study of knee extension
by Signorile et al. (21) who reported that the VM showed
greater electrical activity at a knee angle of 3.05 rad when
the foot was in an internally rotated versus an externally
rotated position. However, for knee angles of 1.57 and
2.62 rad, the neutral position produced significantly higher electrical activity than the internally and externally
rotated positions, respectively. Once again, the differences between the current study and that by Signorile et al.
(21) may have been due to the fact that isometric contractions were examined during their study. Our results
differ from those of Signorile et al. (22) who observed no
significant difference in rmsEMG values due to foot position during 1 repetition of dynamic resistance exercise.
The explanation for these differences may be the increases in electrical activity during the fatiguing sets used in
our study compared to the single repetition tests used by
Signorile et al. Our data also differ from those reported
by Wheatley and Jahnke (27) during isometric contraction of the VM at a knee angle of 1.57 rad, who reported
that the highest activity levels occurred during the lateral
rotation of the tibia. The differences in results between
the 2 studies may have been due to the type of contraction
utilized or the fact that during the study by Wheatley and
Jahnke (27) a specific angle was used, whereas our study
used a full ROM, multirepetition testing protocol.
Our data also revealed significant increases in
NrmsEMG and significant decreases in MdPF across repetitions for all muscles during the concentric phases of
the leg extension. Figures 6 through 8 illustrate the pat-

FIGURE 6. Average normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) of the vastus lateralis of
the subjects across repetitions for the toes in, neutral, and toes
out angles.

FIGURE 7. Average normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) of the rectus femoris of
the subjects across repetitions for the toes in, neutral, and toes
out angles.

terns of change in NrmsEMG under each testing condition for the VL, RF, and VM, respectively. That these patterns were similar regardless of foot angle, as illustrated
in these figures, and the lack of a significant condition 3
repetition interaction for any muscle, shows that all
training conditions were of sufficient intensity to affect
the myoelectric properties of all the muscles tested. Both
the increase in EMG amplitude and the drop in the MdPF
indicate increasing levels of muscular fatigue across the
8-repetition sets for all testing conditions (18, 23). It has
been suggested that the increases in rmsEMG are indicative of a need to increase rate coding and muscle recruitment (17), while the decreases in frequency are the
result of increased metabolite accumulation during fatiguing exercise bouts (12, 29). These results show that
although selected foot positions did allow the individual
to selectively activate one muscle group to a greater degree than others, the fatigue patterns were similar regardless of foot position.

EMG AND FOOT POSITION 937
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

FIGURE 8. Average normalized root mean square of the electromyographical signal (NrmsEMG) of the vastus medialis of
the subjects across repetitions for the toes in, neutral, and toes
out angles.

The results of this study indicate that individual muscles of the superficial quadriceps can be targeted during an
8-repetition constant resistance training set by rotating the
foot using different toe positions as the definitive measure.
Using a TI position will provide the lifter with greater activation of both the VM and VL muscles, while the RF is
better targeted using the TO position. Given the results of
previous isometric studies, it remains to be determined
whether our findings might change over specific ranges of
motion during the dynamic knee extension exercise.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
The objective of the leg extension exercise is to provide an
alternative method for strength development and hypertrophy of the quadriceps in bodybuilding, athletic conditioning, or as part of a rehabilitation program. The results
of this study indicate that internally rotating the lower
limb will optimally target the VL and VM, while external
rotation maximizes the contribution of the RF. Therefore,
pointing the toes inward will increase the activity of the
vasti muscles, whereas pointing the toes outward will increase activity levels in the RF. These findings are directly
applicable to athletes or bodybuilders who are seeking to
equalize muscle imbalances or who want to selectively increase either the size or performance of a specific muscle
of the quadriceps group. From a clinical perspective, this
may be especially helpful in targeting muscles that have
atrophied due to injury or immobilization.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.
4.

ALKNER, B.A., P.A. TESCH, AND H.E. BERG. Quadriceps EMG/
force relationship in knee extension and leg press. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 32:459–463. 2000.
ANDREASSEN, S., AND A. ROSENFALCK. Recording from a single
motor unit during strong effort. IEEE Trans. BME. 25:501–
508. 1978.
BASMAJIAN, J.V., AND C.J. DELUCA. Muscles Alive. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1985.
BEYNNON, B.D., R.J. JOHNSON, B.C. FLEMING, C.J. STANKEWICH, P.A. RENSTROM, AND C.E. NICHOLS. The strain behavior
of the anterior cruciate ligament during squatting and active
flexion-extension: A comparison of an open and a closed chain
exercise. Am. J. Sports Med. 25:823–830. 1997.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

BURKE, E.R., AND H. NEWTON. Improved cycling performance
through strength training. NSCA J. June–July:6–7,70–71.
1983.
COHEN, Z.A., H. ROGLIC, R.P. GRELSAMER, J.H. HENRY, W.N.
LEVINE, V.A. MOW, AND G.A. ATESHIAN. Patellofemoral stresses during open and closed kinetic chain exercises. Am. J. Sport
Med. 21:480–492. 2001.
CRESSWELL, A.G., AND A.H. OVENDAL. Muscle activation and
torque development during maximal unilateral and bilateral
isokinetic knee extensions. J. Sports Med. Phys. Fitness 42:19–
25. 2002.
CROCE, R.V., J.P. MILLER, AND P. ST. PIERRE. Effect of ankle
position on peak torque and electromyographic activity of the
knee flexors and extensors. Electromyogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.
40:365–373. 2000.
ENGLE, R. Dynamic stabilizers of the knee, Part III: Facilitation approaches and concepts of anterior knee instabilities.
Presented at the Shoulder and Knee Injury Seminar of Cincinnati Sports Medicine Institute, 1987.
FARAHMAND, F., M.N. TAHMASBI, AND A. AMIS. The contribution of the medial retinaculum and quadriceps muscles to patellar lateral stability—An in-vitro study. Knee 11:89–94. 2004.
GOUGH, J.V., AND G. LADLEY. An investigation into the effectiveness of various forms of quadriceps exercises. Physiotherapy 57:356–361. 1971.
HOLM, I., S. HAMMER, S. LARSEN, L. NORDSLETTEN, AND H.
STEEN. Can a regular leg extension bench be used in testing
deficits of the quadriceps muscle during rehabilitation? Scand.
J. Med. Sci. Sports 5:29–35. 1995.
HOUDIJK, H., J.J. DE GROOT, M.F. BOBBERT, AND G.J VAN INGEN SCHENAU. Push-off mechanics in speed skating with conventional skates and klapskates. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 32:
635–641. 2000.
LYNN, P.A., N.D. BETTLES, A.D. HUGHES, AND S.W. JOHNSON.
The influence of electrode geometry on bipolar recordings of the
surface electromyogram. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 16:651–660.
1978.
MAFFIULETTI, N.A., AND R. LEPERS. Quadriceps femoris torque
and EMG activity in seated versus supine position. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 35:1511–1516. 2003.
MATHESON, J.W., T.W. KERNOZEK, D.C. FATER, AND G.J. DAVIES. Electromyographic activity and applied load during seated quadriceps exercises. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 33:1713–1725.
2001.
MORITANI, T., M. MURO, AND A. NAGATA. Intramuscular and
surface electromyogram changes during muscle fatigue. J.
Appl. Physiol. 60:1179–1185. 1986.
NICHOLS, T.C., T.C. COPE, AND T.A. ANDREW. Rapid spinal
mechanisms of motor control. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 27:255–
284. 1999.
POCOCK, G. Electromyographic study of the quadriceps during
resistance exercise. Am. Phys. Ther. Assoc. J. 43:427–434. 1963.
ROCHETTE, L., S.K. HUNTER, N. PLACE, AND R. LEPERS. Activation varies among the knee extensor muscles during a submaximal fatiguing contraction in the seated and supine postures. J. Appl. Physiol. 95:1515–1522. 2003.
SIGNORILE, J.F., D. KACSIK, A. PERRY, B. ROBERTSON, R. WILLIAMS, I. LOWENSTEYN, S. DIGEL, J. CARUSO, AND W.G. LEBLANC. The effect of knee and foot position on the electromyographical activity of the superficial quadriceps. J. Orthop.
Sports Phys. Ther. 22:2–9. 1995.
SIGNORILE, J.F., K. KWIATKOWSKI, J.F. CARUSO, AND B. ROBERTSON. Effect of foot position on the electromyographical activity of the superficial quadriceps muscles during the parallel
squat and knee extension. J. Strength Cond. Res. 9:182–187.
1995.
SUTER, E., AND D. LINDSAY. Back muscle fatigability is associated with knee extensor inhibition in subjects with low back
pain. Spine 26:361–366. 2001.

938
24.

STOUTENBERG, PLUCHINO, MA ET AL.
TASKIRAN, E., Z. DINEDURGA, A. YAGIZ, B. ULUDAG, C. ERTEK-

28.

IN, AND V. LOK. Effect of the vastus medialis obliquus on the

25.

26.
27.

patellafemoral joint. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 6:
173–180. 1998.
TEPPERMAN, P.S., J. MAZLIAH, S. NAUMANN, AND J. MOROZ.
Effect of ankle position on isometric quadriceps strengthening.
Am. J. Phys. Med. 58:57–69. 1986.
THOMEÉ, R., J. AUGUSTSSON, AND J. KARLSSON. Patellofemoral
pain syndrome: A review of current issues. Sports Med. 28:245–
262. 1999.
WHEATLEY, M., AND W. JAHNKE. Electromyographical study of
the superficial thigh and hip muscles in normal individuals.
Arch. Phys. Med. 32:508–515. 1951.

29.

WILK, K.E., R.F. ESCAMILLA, G.S. FLEISIG, S.W. BARRENTINE,
J.R. ANDREWS, AND M.L. BOYD. A comparison of tibiofemoral
joint forces and electromyographic activity during open and
closed kinetic chain exercises. Am. J. Sports Med. 24:518–527.
1996.
YOSHITAKE, Y., H. UE, M. MIYAZAKI, AND T. MORITANI. Assessment of lower-back muscle fatigue using electromyography,
mechanomyography, and near-infrared spectroscopy. Eur. J.
Phsiol. 84:174–179. 2001.

Address correspondence
jsignorile@miami.edu.

to

Dr.

Joseph

Signorile,

