917

J Physiol 587.4 (2009) pp 917–926

Coupling between mechanical and neural behaviour
in the human first dorsal interosseous muscle
Anna L. Hudson, Janet L. Taylor, Simon C. Gandevia and Jane E. Butler
Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and the University of New South Wales, Sydney 2031, Australia

The neural drive to a muscle and its biomechanical properties determine the force at a joint. These
factors may be centrally linked. We studied the relationship between the ability of first dorsal
interosseous muscle (FDI) to generate index flexion force around the metacarpophalangeal joint
and the neural drive it receives in a voluntary contraction. The role of FDI was assessed in two
thumb postures, thumb ‘down’ (thumb abducted) and thumb ‘up’ (thumb extended), and at
different thumb carpometacarpal angles. These postures were designed to change acutely the
flexion moment arm for FDI. The flexion twitch force evoked by supramaximal stimulation of
the ulnar nerve was measured in the two postures and the change in moment arm was assessed
by ultrasonography. Subjects also made voluntary flexion contractions of the index finger of
∼5 N in both postures during which neural drive to FDI and the long finger flexor muscles
was measured using surface EMG. Recordings of FDI EMG were normalized to the maximal
M wave. Five of the 15 subjects also had a radial nerve block to eliminate any co-contraction
of the extensor muscles, and extensor muscle EMG was monitored in subjects without radial
nerve block. Compared to thumb up, flexion twitch force was ∼60% greater, and the flexion
moment arm was ∼50% greater with the thumb down. There was minimal effect of altered
carpometacarpal angle on flexion twitch force for either thumb posture. During voluntary
flexion contractions, normalized FDI EMG was ∼28% greater with thumb down, compared to
thumb up, with no consistent change in neural drive to the long flexors. Hence, the contribution
of FDI to index finger flexion can be altered by changes in thumb position. This is linked to
changes in neural drive to FDI such that neural drive increases when the mechanical contribution
increases, and provides a central mechanism to produce efficient voluntary movements.
(Received 15 October 2008; accepted after revision 23 December 2008; first published online 5 January 2009)
Corresponding author S. Gandevia: Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Barker St Randwick, NSW 2031
Australia. Email: s.gandevia@unsw.edu.au

The amount of force that a muscle can produce
depends on several key biomechanical factors such as
its length–tension relation, the muscle’s physiological
cross-sectional area and specific tension, the pennation
angle of the muscle fibres, and the moment arm of the
muscle–tendon unit (Gordon et al. 1966; Otten, 1988;
Zajac, 1992; Maganaris, 2001, 2004). In addition, the
degree of voluntary activation, i.e. neural drive to the
muscle, influences force generation (e.g. Adrian & Bronk,
1929). The amount of force a muscle can produce (due to
the biomechanical factors listed above), and the neural
drive it receives in a voluntary contraction, may be
coupled. In the human intercostal muscles, inspiratory
neural drive is related to the specific mechanical advantage
of the different regions of the muscle (De Troyer et al. 2003;
Gandevia et al. 2006; for review see De Troyer et al. 2005).
We have studied, in first dorsal interosseous (FDI), the
relationship between the amount of force that the muscle

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

can generate, and how the muscle is ‘driven’ in a voluntary
contraction.
FDI is a bipennate muscle with two distinct heads
(Masquelet et al. 1986; Fig. 1A). The deep muscle head
originates on the lateral, palmar surface of the second
metacarpal, and the superficial head, which is ∼70%
larger in volume than the deep head (Chao et al. 1989),
originates on the medial aspect of the first metacarpal. The
fibres from the superficial head twist as they approach the
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint such that those with a
more distal origin insert more dorsally. Fibres from the
two muscle heads converge to form a tendinous sheet that
inserts on the lateral tubercle on the base of the proximal
phalanx of the index finger, and it also blends into the
interosseous hood (or extensor aponeurosis; Jones, 1949;
Masquelet et al. 1986).
As a result of its intricate anatomy, FDI has both a
flexion and abduction moment arm at the MCP joint
DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.165043

918

A. L. Hudson and others

(An et al. 1983). At 0 deg of flexion of the index finger, the
moment arm for flexion forces is ∼4 mm for the superficial
head of FDI, and 0 mm for the deep head (An et al. 1983).
The deep head has a peak flexion moment arm of ∼5 mm
at ∼45 deg of index finger flexion. In this study (An et al.
1983), tendon excursion was measured in the index finger
taken from amputated limbs and the effect of movement of
the thumb was not studied. When considering the action of
the superficial head, isolation of the index finger presents
a difficulty as FDI originates on the first metacarpal of
the thumb. A change in thumb posture should alter the
biomechanics of the superficial head of FDI for finger
flexion, but there are no reports of the effect of thumb
posture on the flexion moment arm of FDI.
Studies of human skeletal muscles have suggested
that some motor units or muscles are recruited with
regard to their direction of pull or contribution to force
(e.g. Desmedt & Godaux, 1981; ter Haar Romeny et al.
1982; McMillan & Hannam, 1992; Kennedy & Cresswell,

J Physiol 587.4

2001). However, they have not specifically linked changes
in motor unit recruitment to known changes in the
contribution of a muscle at a joint, i.e. its ‘mechanical
advantage’ or ‘mechanical effectiveness’. We studied the
contribution of FDI to flexion forces at the index finger,
and the neural drive to this muscle during voluntary
flexion contractions, in two thumb postures that were
designed to change the flexion moment arm of the superficial head of the muscle originating on the thumb. We
hypothesized that the contribution of FDI for flexion
forces at the MCP joint, i.e. the flexion moment arm of
FDI, could be increased by a change in thumb posture,
and that this change in muscle-tendon mechanics would
lead to increased neural drive to FDI during a voluntary
contraction. If this occurred, it would indicate that the
central nervous system takes into account the mechanical
effectiveness of a muscle when executing a voluntary task.
Our hypothesis is in contrast to what would be expected
if the joint were controlled by a single muscle. There, an
increase in mechanical effectiveness of the muscle would
decrease the neural drive required to produce the same
force.
Methods
The contribution of FDI to index finger flexion force at
the MCP joint in two thumb postures (‘thumb down’
and ‘thumb up’, see below for details) was assessed
by measuring flexion twitch force at different thumb
carpometacarpal joint angles over the physiological range.
To determine the mechanism underlying the contribution
of FDI to flexion forces, the flexion moment arm of FDI
was assessed by ultrasonography. In a second experiment,
electromyographic (EMG) recordings from FDI and the
long flexors of the index finger were made during voluntary
flexion contractions of the index finger in the two thumb
postures. A total of 15 healthy adult volunteers participated
(32 ± 10 years of age, mean ± S.D., seven females). The
procedures were approved by the local ethics committee
and conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki, and all
subjects gave their informed written consent prior to
participation.

Figure 1. First dorsal interosseous and thumb posture
A, diagram of the two muscle heads of first dorsal interosseous (FDI).
The muscle originates on the first and second metacarpal bones. Its
fibres converge, and insert on the lateral aspect of the proximal
phalanx, distal to the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint. A
carpometacarpal angle of ∼38 deg is shown. The dashed box over the
MCP joint indicates the location of the ultrasound transducer (see
Fig. 3). B, schematic drawing to show the thumb postures in which
flexion twitch force was evoked, the flexion moment arm of FDI was
measured, and subjects made voluntary contractions (see Methods).
Left, thumb down; right, thumb up.

Study 1: effect of thumb posture on flexion twitch
force and flexion moment arm of FDI

Subjects were seated with their right arm resting on a
table on the ulnar side of the forearm with the wrist held
straight. They were instructed to relax at the wrist, elbow
and shoulder. The arm was held firmly in this position,
in particular, at the metacarpals and wrist. The index
finger was splinted but movement around the MCP joint
was not constrained. To measure isometric force in the
flexion direction, a ring around the splinted index finger,

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 587.4

Mechanical and neural behaviour in first dorsal interosseous muscle

just proximal to the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint
was attached to a load cell (Xtran, Melbourne, Australia)
via a rigid rod. The arm and finger remained in this
set-up throughout the study, but the thumb was placed
at different angles (relative to the index finger) in two
thumb postures (Fig. 1B).
In one posture, ‘thumb down’, the thumb was abducted
at an angle, so that it was parallel to the table (Fig. 1B, left
panel). In the other posture, the thumb was extended,
and in the same vertical plane as the wrist and index
finger, and this is referred to as ‘thumb up’ (Fig. 1B, right
panel). In each posture (i.e. thumb down or up), a range
of carpometacarpal joint angles was tested to look for
the effect of changes in FDI muscle length. For thumb
down, we measured twitch force as close as possible to
full adduction (i.e. ∼0 deg abduction) and then at 7.5 deg
increments to full abduction, while the thumb remained
parallel to the table. For thumb up, we measured twitch
force at 7.5 deg increments from as close as possible to
full flexion, to full extension, while the thumb remained in
the vertical plane. For each subject, at least five, and up
to nine different angles were measured depending on the
passive range of movement at the carpometacarpal joint.
The maximal M wave (M max , see below) was determined
at the longest muscle length, i.e. full abduction for thumb
down, or full extension for thumb up, and the twitch
force was determined for the longest muscle length first,
and then for progressively shorter lengths. The thumb was
taped firmly to a support at all angles, and the order in
which the postures were tested was random.
To determine maximal twitch force in the flexion
direction, electrical stimuli were delivered via surface
electrodes over the ulnar nerve, usually a few centimetres
proximal to the wrist. The cathode was on the palmar side
of the wrist, and the anode on the dorsal side. EMG was
recorded from FDI with surface electrodes (see Study 2
for details). The stimulus intensity (66–209 mA, 100 μs
duration, DS7AH constant-current stimulator; Digitimer,
Welwyn Garden City, UK) was at least 10% above that
required to produce M max in FDI. At each thumb posture
and angle, supramaximal stimuli were delivered 5–10 s
apart (5 in total).
In a separate session, in six subjects, an ultrasound unit
(Phillips iU22, Bothell, WA, USA) was used to determine
the effect of thumb posture on the position of the FDI
tendon relative to the MCP joint. The moment arm
of a muscle is the perpendicular distance between the
muscle-tendon unit and centre of joint rotation (e.g.
Smidt, 1973; Rugg et al. 1990). Here, the distance between
the FDI tendon and the lateral tubercle on the second
metacarpal head was used to estimate changes in the
flexion moment arm of FDI.
For the ultrasound study, subjects were seated with their
right hand resting on the ulnar side of the forearm and
the wrist and index finger were held straight. The thumb

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

919

was positioned in a thumb down posture at ∼38 deg of
carpometacarpal flexion. Surface electrodes were placed
over FDI to monitor FDI EMG. Axial images were obtained
with a 32 mm 15–7 MHz linear transducer placed transversally on, or just proximal (by no more than ∼5 mm)
to the axis of rotation for flexion of the index finger at
the MCP joint. The possible error in placement (< 5 mm
from the axis of rotation) is similar to that in studies of
moment arm in vivo that simply estimate the joint centre
location using anatomical landmarks (Fowler et al. 2001).
The transducer was adjusted so that optimal images of
the FDI tendon and the lateral edge of the head of the
second metacarpal could be visualized. Once the images
were optimal, the transducer was manually stabilized
while the thumb was moved passively from a thumb
down, to a thumb up posture. The carpometacarpal angle
was maintained between thumb postures. Subjects were
instructed to relax during the study and had visual feedback of FDI EMG. Repeated sequences (5 s duration) were
captured before, during and after thumb movement. The
images were displayed in real time and digitally sampled
at 30 Hz for analysis.

Study 2: effect of thumb posture on FDI EMG activity
in a voluntary contraction

The set-up was similar to Study 1, but to measure flexion
force, the ring at the PIP joint was attached to the load
cell via a wire. Subjects received visual feedback of force
throughout the experiment and made voluntary isometric
flexion contractions of the index finger at the MCP
joint to 5 N (∼5–10% maximal voluntary contraction).
Contractions were made with the thumb in the two
postures, thumb down and thumb up (as above), at
a carpometacarpal angle of ∼38 deg. Care was taken
to ensure the angle was the same in both postures.
Contractions were repeated 20 times in each thumb posture, with at least 10 s between contractions. M max in FDI
was also determined at each thumb posture. The order in
which the postures were tested was random.
EMG was recorded from FDI, the long flexors
of the index finger (flexor digitorum superficialis
and profundus), and the extensor muscles (extensor
digitorum communis and indicis), via adhesive surface
electrodes (Ag–AgCl; 10 mm diameter; Cleartrace,
ConMed Corporation, Utica, NY, USA) placed ∼5 cm
apart. For FDI, one electrode was placed on the proximal
part of the muscle close to the second metacarpal (to
minimize movement artefact with changes in thumb posture) and the other electrode was ∼5 cm distally, over the
MCP joint. For the long finger flexors and extensors,
electrode placement on the volar and dorsal surface of
the forearm was approximately two-thirds of the distance
between the styloid, and the medial or lateral epicondyle,

920

A. L. Hudson and others

respectively. The sites were confirmed by palpation of
the relevant muscles. The electrodes on the forearm are
likely to record activity in other finger and wrist flexor
and extensor muscles activated inadvertently. As in Study
1, supramaximal stimuli (110% M max , 55–200 mA) were
delivered at the ulnar nerve to determine M max in FDI.
To measure the activity in FDI and the long finger
flexors during flexion contractions at the MCP joint,
without co-contraction of the extensor muscles, 5 of the
15 subjects had a radial nerve block at the mid-humerus
level which paralysed the wrist extensors and long
extensors of the thumb and fingers. This was produced
by injection of local anaesthetic (2% lignocaine with
adrenaline, 2–3 mg kg−1 , and 0.5% bupivacaine with
adrenaline, 1–1.5 mg kg−1 ), around the radial nerve at the
mid-humerus level. Injections were guided by stimulation
via the injecting needle (Stimuplex A 22-G, B. Braun,
Melsungen, Germany). The nerve block was complete as
judged by paralysis of radial innervated muscles, loss of
response to radial nerve stimulation, and loss of sensation
in the territory of the superficial radial nerve. In subjects
with radial nerve block, EMG was not measured from the
extensor muscles.
For Studies 1 and 2, the EMG signals were amplified,
filtered (16–1000 Hz), and sampled at 2000 Hz for off-line
analysis using customised software (Grass amplifier,
Warwick, RI, USA; CED 1902 amplifiers, CED 1401 with
Signal and Spike2 software, Cambridge Electronic Design,
Cambridge, UK). Force was sampled at 1000 Hz.

Analysis

Mean maximal flexion twitch force was calculated from
the peak amplitudes of five twitches evoked by ulnar nerve
stimulation (e.g. Fig. 2A). For thumb down and thumb
up postures, the average twitch force was calculated for six
angles, or ∼38 deg range of thumb abduction or extension
(more angles were tested in some subjects, but were not
included in the analysis). A missing value for one subject
with the thumb up at ∼38 deg was replaced with the group
mean for analysis (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1989). Absolute
values are reported in the text, but data were normalized
to the average twitch force at full adduction in the thumb
down posture in Fig. 4.
The ultrasound images were viewed off-line (Sante
DICOM Viewer). We tracked the position of the FDI
tendon and the lateral tubercle of the second metacarpal
head. The FDI tendon was visualized for several cycles
of movement between thumb postures, but for one cycle,
the first (thumb down) and last (thumb up) frames were
selected for analysis (Fig. 3A and B). There was little or no
FDI EMG (< 0.5% of EMG in a maximal effort) during the
ultrasound recordings (e.g. Fig. 3C). For each image, the
perpendicular distance between the centroid of the FDI

J Physiol 587.4

tendon, and a reference point on the lateral tubercle of the
metacarpal was measured using in-built software callipers.
The reference point was clearly identified throughout the
ultrasound recordings.
In Study 2, subjects without radial nerve block had
some EMG activity in finger extensors during the
flexion contractions (e.g. Fig. 2C). Therefore, of the 20
contractions recorded, those with matched extensor
activity in each thumb posture were selected and analysed.
Five to ten contractions were analysed for each subject
and thumb posture. For subjects with a radial nerve block,
10 contractions were analysed. Flexion force and EMG
levels (root mean square (r.m.s.); time constant, 0.05 s)
were measured over ∼3 s of each contraction at the target
force (Fig. 2C). Baseline force, and r.m.s. EMG during
complete relaxation were measured (to estimate background noise) and subtracted from values during the test
contractions. To correct for changes in EMG amplitude
associated with positional changes of the thumb, mean
FDI r.m.s. EMG was normalized to the (average) r.m.s.
of the M max potentials for each subject and thumb
posture (Fig. 2B). EMG data are reported as absolute
values in the text, but are illustrated in Fig. 5 normalized
to thumb down for each subject.
Statistics

Group data from the 15 subjects are presented as
means ± S.D. in the text and means ± S.E.M. are shown in
the figures. In Study 1, comparison between the twitch
force at different angles of carpometacarpal abduction
or extension, and between thumb down and thumb up
were made by a two-way repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA), with angle and thumb posture as
factors, and post hoc testing using Tukey’s procedure. For
the ultrasound study, and in Study 2, Student’s paired
t test was performed to assess differences in all parameters
between thumb down and thumb up, and unpaired t tests
were performed to compare between subjects with, and
without a radial nerve block. Statistical significance was
set at P < 0.05.
Results
Study 1

To determine the effect of thumb posture and thumb
(carpometacarpal) angle on the contribution of FDI to
index finger flexion at the MCP joint, angle–twitch force
curves were determined for the thumb up and thumb
down (Fig. 4). With the thumb up, flexion twitch force
evoked by supramaximal stimulation of the ulnar nerve
was similar at all six carpometacarpal angles (over a range
of ∼38 deg; P > 0.05). It was 1.2 ± 0.7 N (mean ± S.D.)
at the largest angle analysed (∼38 deg extension), and

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

Mechanical and neural behaviour in first dorsal interosseous muscle

J Physiol 587.4

1.4 ± 0.8 N at the smallest angle with the joint close to
full flexion. With the thumb down, there was an effect
of carpometacarpal angle on flexion twitch force at the
smallest angle only. Flexion twitch force was 2.3 ± 1.0 N at
the largest angle (∼38 deg abduction), and similar at other
angles, except the smallest angle (close to full adduction).
Here, the average twitch force was 1.9 ± 0.7 N (P < 0.001).
Compared to thumb up, twitch force was ∼60% greater
with the thumb down at all joint angles tested (Fig. 4;
P < 0.001).
Using ultrasonography, the tendon of FDI was
visualized on the palmar side of the second metacarpal

A

(Fig. 3). The perpendicular distance between the centroid
of the FDI tendon and the lateral tubercle of the second
metacarpal head was 9.1 ± 2.4 mm with thumb down, and
6.5 ± 2.5 mm when the thumb was moved passively to the
thumb up posture (P < 0.001). The tendon moved, on
average, 2.6 mm (range 1.9–3.4 mm in 6 subjects).
Study 2

Subjects made flexion contractions of the index finger at
the MCP joint to a target force of 5 N with the thumb
supported in extension in the ‘thumb up’ posture, or

B

C

Figure 2. Data from a single subject for flexion twitch force and voluntary contractions
A, flexion twitch force was evoked by supramaximal stimulation of the ulnar nerve in the two thumb postures, and
at different carpometacarpal angles. Five twitches (grey traces) and the average (black traces) are superimposed for
the thumb down, and thumb up postures at a carpometacarpal angle of ∼38 deg. B, M max in FDI was determined
in the two thumb postures. Shaded regions indicate the area used to determine the root mean square (r.m.s.) of
M max potentials. FDI EMG was normalized to r.m.s. amplitude at each thumb posture. Arrows indicate time of
stimulation. C, typical recordings from an intact subject during voluntary flexion contractions at the index MCP
joint of ∼5 N with the thumb down (left panel) and up (right panel). From top to bottom, panels show finger
flexion force, and surface EMG recordings from first dorsal interosseous (FDI), the long finger flexors, and long
finger extensors. The voluntary isometric contractions lasted ∼5 s. Force and r.m.s. EMG were measured over ∼3 s
(between vertical lines). Vertical calibrations: 250 μV for FDI and 10 μV for long flexors and extensors.

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

921

922

A. L. Hudson and others

J Physiol 587.4

Figure 3. Data from a single subject for
analysis of the flexion moment arm in
FDI
Ultrasound images of the FDI tendon and
distal head of the second metacarpal
captured with the thumb down (panel A)
and thumb up (panel B). The perpendicular
distance between the centroid of the
tendon (shown with cross) and reference
point on the metacarpal (shown with
arrow) was measured to estimate the
flexion moment arm. Ultrasound images
were taken in passive conditions as
confirmed by a lack of FDI EMG during the
ultrasound capture (panel C). The time at
which frames were selected for analysis are
indicated by the arrows (A: thumb down;
B: thumb up). Vertical calibration: 100 μV.

in abduction with the ‘thumb down’. For the 15 subjects, the targeted voluntary force produced with the
thumb up (5.1 ± 0.2 N) did not differ from thumb down
contractions (5.2 ± 0.2 N; P > 0.05). For subjects without
a radial nerve block (n = 10), finger extensor r.m.s. EMG
did not differ between contractions in the two thumb
postures (2.8 ± 1.9 μV for both; P > 0.05).

Figure 4. Angle–twitch force relationships for flexion of the
index finger evoked by stimulation of the ulnar nerve in the
two thumb postures
Flexion twitch force for the index finger was measured over a ∼38 deg
range from near full adduction to ∼38 deg of abduction with the
thumb down (◦), and over a ∼38 deg range from near full flexion to
∼38 deg of extension with the thumb up (•). Twitch force was
normalized to that at near full adduction with the thumb down for
each subject (n = 15). There was minimal change in mean (± S.E.M.)
flexion twitch force with altered carpometacarpal angle within a
thumb posture, but twitch force was always 30–60% greater when
the thumb was down, compared to the thumb up.

The size of M max was similar in the two thumb postures (e.g. Fig. 2B). For the group, M max amplitude was
19.4 ± 4.2 mV and 20.5 ± 4.3 mV for the thumb up and
thumb down, respectively, and the r.m.s. of M max was also
similar for thumb up and thumb down (5.1 ± 1.2 and
5.2 ± 1.2 mV, respectively; P > 0.05). To control for any
artefactual change in EMG with altered thumb posture,
FDI r.m.s. EMG was normalized to the r.m.s. of M max at
each thumb posture.
During the voluntary flexion contractions of similar
absolute force (and similar level of extensor EMG, see
above), EMG from FDI and the long finger flexors
was measured. FDI activity was 28% greater during
voluntary contractions with the thumb down (Fig. 5).
The ratio of FDI r.m.s. EMG to the r.m.s. of M max
was 0.011 ± 0.006 with the thumb up, and 0.014 ± 0.006
with the thumb down (P < 0.01). Changes in long flexor
r.m.s. EMG between thumb positions were more variable,
and overall there was no significant change. Long flexor
r.m.s. EMG was 32.4 ± 20.5 μV with the thumb up, and
30.6 ± 22.3 μV during contractions with the thumb down
(Fig. 5B). FDI, or long flexor EMG did not differ between
groups of subjects with, and without radial nerve block
(P > 0.05).
Discussion
The novel aspect of this study is that when the mechanical
effectiveness of a muscle is increased at a joint where
more than one muscle can exert force, there is an adaptive
increase in the neural drive to that muscle. Based on flexion
twitch force, the contribution of FDI to finger flexion
at the MCP joint can be altered by positional changes
to the thumb, but there is limited change at different

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

Mechanical and neural behaviour in first dorsal interosseous muscle

J Physiol 587.4

carpometacarpal angles. As measured with ultrasound, the
flexion moment arm changes with thumb posture, and like
flexion twitch force, it is greater with the thumb down. In
voluntary flexion contractions at the MCP joint, there is
greater EMG in FDI with the thumb down, compared to
contractions of the same force with the thumb up. Thus,
neural drive to FDI is distributed according to the muscle’s
ability to contribute force in a finger flexion task, and the
change in drive is consistent with a central strategy which
would produce movements efficiently (see also De Troyer
et al. 2005).

FDI and mechanical effectiveness: the effect
of thumb posture

FDI has a greater contribution to flexion force at any
muscle length tested across all joint angles with the thumb
down, compared to thumb up, and this increase is most
likely to be due to an increase in the flexion moment
arm of this muscle. The effect of thumb posture on the
moment arm of FDI has not been determined previously.
Investigations of the moment arm of FDI in amputated
limbs used an isolated index finger (An et al. 1983), and
measurement of the moment arm in vivo maintained the
position of the thumb (Fowler et al. 2001). We found that
when the thumb was moved from up to down, the tendon
of FDI moved in a palmar direction such that the distance
between the FDI tendon and metacarpal bone (close to the

A

axis of rotation for flexion) was 2.6 mm greater with the
thumb down. The change in the moment arm is likely to
be due to the superficial head of the muscle, as the position
of the second metacarpal, to which the deep head of FDI
attaches, was constant.
We did not measure the distance between the FDI
tendon and the centre of rotation of the MCP joint, as
only the edge of the metacarpal bone could be visualized
with ultrasound. However, if we express the change in
distance between the tendon and metacarpal edge, relative
to the moment arm found in isolated index fingers from
amputated limbs (4 mm at 0 deg index finger flexion; An
et al. 1983), the change represents a 65% increase in the
moment arm of FDI when the thumb is repositioned to a
down posture. By comparison, there was a 60% increase
in the maximal flexion twitch force of FDI with the thumb
down.
Other factors which could influence the ability of FDI
to produce flexion forces at the MCP joint include a shift
on the length–tension curve of FDI, and a change in the
pennation angle of the muscle fascicles. However, these
factors appear less important than changes in moment
arm. The changes in FDI muscle length and pennation
angle with changes in the angle of carpometacarpal
extension or abduction did not alter the contribution
of FDI to flexion force at the MCP joint across most
of the physiological range. Carpometacarpal angle had
a moderate effect on the maximal flexion twitch force
at full adduction for the thumb down posture. This

B

Figure 5. Muscle activation during a voluntary flexion contraction of 5 N at the index MCP joint in the
two thumb postures
Panels show individual (open symbols) and mean ± S.E.M. (filled circles) from 15 subjects. Data from subjects with
a radial nerve block are shown as open diamonds (n = 5). Data are normalized to values with the thumb down
for each subject. A, for 14/15 subjects and the group, FDI activity was greater during voluntary contractions
with the thumb down compared to those with the thumb up. One subject had almost no activation of FDI
during contractions with the thumb up and showed a marked increase in its activity when the thumb was down.
Irrespective of whether data from this subject were included, FDI activity was significantly greater in the posture
with a greater mechanical effectiveness (thumb down; P < 0.01). B, the change in activity in the long flexors
during flexion contractions was variable. For the majority of subjects (10/15 subjects), there was less long flexor
EMG in contractions with the thumb down, but this was not statistically significant for the group.

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

923

924

A. L. Hudson and others

contrasts with other muscles, for example, the elbow flexor
(Prasartwuth et al. 2006), and ankle dorsiflexor (Koh &
Herzog, 1995) muscles, in which large increases (∼30%
or more) in evoked torque occur with altered joint angle.
Either FDI muscle fibre length is less sensitive to changes in
joint angle, or the length–tension curve for FDI is relatively
flat (for flexion force). The pennation angle of FDI fibres is
low (∼9 deg), but values were not given for the two heads
of FDI, or for different thumb postures (Jacobson et al.
1992).

Neural drive to FDI during voluntary flexion
contractions

In concert with the greater mechanical effectiveness of
FDI for flexion force at the index finger with the thumb
down, the neural drive to FDI increased during voluntary
contractions with the thumb down, as evidenced by a 28%
increase in FDI EMG.
EMG was recorded with surface electrodes near the
second metacarpal and will include activity from both
superficial and deep muscle compartments although the
component of FDI attached to the first metacarpal is larger
and superficial (Chao et al. 1989). As the increase in flexion
mechanical effectiveness of FDI with positional changes
to the thumb is likely to be due to the movement of
the moment arm of the superficial head, the increase in
FDI EMG in voluntary flexion contractions may reflect an
increase in neural drive to this region also. However, in two
subjects, both heads of FDI were active in index flexion
against resistance, with more activity reported in the deep
compared to the superficial head (Masquelet et al. 1986).
Unfortunately, the flexion angle of the MCP joint at which
the contractions were made was not given (Masquelet et al.
1986). The moment arms of the two heads of FDI vary
with the degree of index finger flexion (An et al. 1983),
and therefore, their relative activity may alter with flexion
angle. In voluntary contractions, the first lumbrical muscle
may have contributed to the recorded EMG and flexion
force at the MCP joint, but its contribution is likely to be
small, and unaltered by changes in thumb posture (Lauer
et al. 1999).
To produce the same finger flexion force, an increase
in FDI activity should be accompanied by a decrease in
activation of synergistic muscles. However, no decrease
in activity of the long flexors was seen. Although care
was taken to place the electrodes over the long flexor
muscles of the index finger, surface EMG recordings are
unselective, and the expected decrease in activity was
presumably masked by activity in nearby finger and wrist
flexor muscles.
The level of agonist muscle activity required to produce
a set force must increase if the antagonist muscle
contracts. To minimize this potential error, we matched

J Physiol 587.4

finger extensor EMG during contractions in the two
thumb postures in 10 ‘intact’ subjects, and completely
eliminated differences in co-contraction in five subjects by
a radial nerve block. In subjects with radial nerve block, in
whom voluntary extension at the MCP joint was abolished,
there was less long flexor EMG with the thumb down for
4 out of 5 subjects.

Coupling of mechanical effectiveness and neural drive

When performing the same flexion task with different
thumb postures, the neural drive to FDI changed
according to its mechanical effectiveness. Hence, it may
be recruited in a task-dependent way in which the amount
of force it produces and the neural drive it receives are
linked.
Task-related changes in the discharge behaviour of
motor units in FDI have been reported. FDI contributes
to abduction and flexion forces (Thomas et al. 1986;
Enoka et al. 1989; Kutch et al. 2007). However, in
∼10% of FDI motor unit pairs, the threshold force at
which units are recruited is less in abduction compared
to flexion (Desmedt & Godaux, 1981; Enoka et al.
1989), or the recruitment order in pairs of motor units
is altered (Desmedt & Godaux, 1981; Thomas et al.
1986), particularly when pairs are sampled from different
recording sites in FDI (Desmedt & Godaux, 1981). There
are similar examples of task-dependent alterations of
motor unit behaviour in other muscles of the limb,
jaw and thorax (e.g. ter Haar Romeny et al. 1982;
McMillan & Hannam, 1992; Kennedy & Cresswell, 2001;
De Troyer et al. 2003; Mottram et al. 2005; Gandevia
et al. 2006). In the human intercostal muscles, there is
recruitment according to a principle of neuromechanical
matching (Butler et al. 2007), whereby parts of an intercostal muscle are recruited according to their relative
inspiratory mechanical advantage. Although recruitment
of motor units by this principle maximizes the efficiency of
ventilation (De Troyer et al. 2005), it should be applicable
to other muscles, such as FDI, to maximize movement
efficiency.
If there is a coupling of or mechanical effectiveness
and neural drive, what is the mechanism responsible
for the matching? Receptors, such as those in the skin,
muscles and joints, signal muscle length, force and joint
angle, and these inputs could be integrated by the central
nervous system to determine the overall biomechanical
state of a multijoint system, and recruit muscles and/or
motor units accordingly with the most efficient strategy.
For the intercostal muscles, recruitment by inspiratory
mechanical advantage remains even when afferent feedback is altered or removed (De Troyer & Legrand, 1995;
De Troyer et al. 1996; Legrand et al. 1996). A similar
invariance has been reported for recruitment of two

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

J Physiol 587.4

Mechanical and neural behaviour in first dorsal interosseous muscle

human inspiratory muscles operating on the upper rib
cage (Hudson et al. 2007). This suggests that the pattern
of respiratory neural drive to the inspiratory muscles
is ‘preset’. However, in all these studies, mechanical
advantage was not changed acutely, and therefore the
altered afferent feedback was not appropriate to signal
a change in mechanical advantage. For FDI, where
mechanical effectiveness can change depending on posture
or position, neural recruitment strategies can also change.
This suggests that the mechanical performance of FDI is
either signalled acutely by afferents or is known from prior
experience.
References
Adrian ED & Bronk DW (1929). The discharge of impulses in
motor nerve fibres: Part II. The frequency of discharge in
reflex and voluntary contractions. J Physiol 67, 119–151.
An KN, Ueba Y, Chao EY, Cooney WP & Linscheid RL (1983).
Tendon excursion and moment arm of index finger muscles.
J Biomech 16, 419–425.
Butler JE, De Troyer A, Gandevia SC, Gorman RB & Hudson
AL (2007). Neuromechanical matching of central respiratory
drive: a new principle of motor unit recruitment? Physiology
News 67, 22–24 (http://www.physoc.org).
Chao EYS, An K-N, Cooney WP & Linscheid RL (1989).
Quantitative analysis of the intrinsic and extrinsic
musculature of the hand. Biomechanics of the Hand: A Basic
Research Study, pp. 31–51. World Scientific Publishing Co.,
Singapore.
De Troyer A, Gorman RB & Gandevia SC (2003). Distribution
of inspiratory drive to the external intercostal muscles in
humans. J Physiol 546, 943–954.
De Troyer A, Kirkwood PA & Wilson TA (2005). Respiratory
action of the intercostal muscles. Physiol Rev 85, 717–756.
De Troyer A & Legrand A (1995). Inhomogenous activation of
the parasternal intercostals during breathing. J Appl Physiol
79, 55–62.
De Troyer A, Legrand A, Gayan-Ramirez G, Cappello M &
Decramer M (1996). On the mechanism of the mediolateral
gradient of parasternal activation. J Appl Physiol 80,
1490–1494.
Desmedt JE & Godaux E (1981). Spinal motoneuron
recruitment in man: rank deordering with direction but not
with speed of voluntary movement. Science 214, 933–936.
Enoka RM, Robinson GA & Kossev AR (1989). Task and fatigue
effects on low-threshold motor units in human hand muscle.
J Neurophysiol 62, 1344–1359.
Fowler NK, Nicol AC, Condon B & Hadley D (2001). Method
of determination of three dimensional index finger moment
arms and tendon lines of action using high resolution MRI
scans. J Biomech 34, 791–797.
Gandevia SC, Hudson AL, Gorman RB, Butler JE & De Troyer
A (2006). Spatial distribution of inspiratory drive to the
parasternal intercostal muscles in humans. J Physiol 573,
263–275.
Gordon AM, Huxley AF & Julian FJ (1966). The variation in
isometric tension with sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle
fibres. J Physiol 184, 170–192.

C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

925

Hudson AL, Gandevia SC & Butler JE (2007). The effect of lung
volume on the co-ordinated recruitment of scalene and
sternomastoid muscles in humans. J Physiol 584,
261–270.
Jacobson MD, Raab R, Fazeli BM, Abrams RA, Botte MJ &
Lieber RL (1992). Architectural design of the human
intrinsic hand muscles. J Hand Surg [Am] 17, 804–809.
Jones FW (1949). The Principles of Anatomy as Seen in the
Hand. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, London.
Kennedy PM & Cresswell AG (2001). The effect of muscle
length on motor-unit recruitment during isometric plantar
flexion in humans. Exp Brain Res 137, 58–64.
Koh TJ & Herzog W (1995). Evaluation of voluntary and
elicited dorsiflexor torque-angle relationships. J Appl Physiol
79, 2007–2013.
Kutch JJ, Suresh NL, Bloch AM & Rymer WZ (2007). Analysis
of the effects of firing rate and synchronization on spiketriggered averaging of multidirectional motor unit torque.
J Comput Neurosci 22, 347–361.
Lauer RT, Kilgore KL, Peckham PH, Bhadra N & Keith MW
(1999). The function of the finger intrinsic muscles in
response to electrical stimulation. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 7,
19–26.
Legrand A, Brancatisano A, Decramer M & De Troyer A
(1996). Rostrocaudal gradient of the electrical activation in
the parasternal intercostal muscles of the dog. J Physiol 495,
247–254.
Maganaris CN (2001). Force-length characteristics of in vivo
human skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol Scand 172, 279–285.
Maganaris CN (2004). A predictive model of moment-angle
characteristics in human skeletal muscle: application and
validation in muscles across the ankle joint. J Theor Biol 230,
89–98.
Masquelet AC, Salama J, Outrequin G, Serrault M & Chevrel JP
(1986). Morphology and functional anatomy of the first
dorsal interosseous muscle of the hand. Surg Radiol Anat 8,
19–28.
McMillan AS & Hannam AG (1992). Task-related behavior of
motor units in different regions of the human masseter
muscle. Arch Oral Biol 37, 849–857.
Mottram CJ, Christou EA, Meyer FG & Enoka RM (2005).
Frequency modulation of motor unit discharge has taskdependent effects on fluctuations in motor output.
J Neurophysiol 94, 2878–2887.
Otten E (1988). Concepts and models of functional architecture
in skeletal muscle. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 16, 89–137.
Prasartwuth O, Allen TJ, Butler JE, Gandevia SC & Taylor JL
(2006). Length-dependent changes in voluntary activation,
maximum voluntary torque and twitch responses after
eccentric damage in humans. J Physiol 571, 243–252.
Rugg SG, Gregor RJ, Mandelbaum BR & Chiu L (1990). In vivo
moment arm calculations at the ankle using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). J Biomech 23, 495–501.
Smidt GL (1973). Biomechanical analysis of knee flexion and
extension. J Biomech 6, 79–92.
Tabachnick BG & Fidell LS (1989). Using Multivariate Statistics.
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., New York.
ter Haar Romeny BM, Denier van der Gon JJ & Gielen CC
(1982). Changes in recruitment order of motor units in the
human biceps muscle. Exp Neurol 78, 360–368.

926

A. L. Hudson and others

Thomas CK, Ross BH & Stein RB (1986). Motor-unit
recruitment in human first dorsal interosseous muscle for
static contractions in three different directions.
J Neurophysiol 55, 1017–1029.
Zajac FE (1992). How musculotendon architecture and joint
geometry affect the capacity of muscles to move and exert
force on objects: a review with application to arm and
forearm tendon transfer design. J Hand Surg [Am] 17,
799–804.

J Physiol 587.4

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Health
and Medical Research Council.


C 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation 
C 2009 The Physiological Society

